departments indian institute of technology jodhpur iit jodhpur redirecttologinpage !!! bioscience bioengineering chemistry chemical engineering civil and infrastructure engineering computer science engineering electrical engineering mathematics mechanical engineering materials engineering physics important links cccd iitj recruitment correspondence rti tenders techscape contact old website nccr portal how to reach iitj institute repository donations web policy web information manager feedback cert-in help nirf internal committee intranet links copyright all rights reserved this portal is owned, designed, and developed by digital infrastructure automation , iit jodhpur. n.h. , nagaur road, karwar, jodhpur - , rajasthan india for any comments enquiries feedback, please email the wim . arrow downward
chemistry iit jodhpur redirecttologinpage !!! welcome to department of chemistry head's message a warm welcome to the department of chemistry at iit jodhpur, which was established in . since the inception, the department has taken major strides forward in teaching, research and technology development. our department offers a variety of academic programs including msc years , msc chemistry -mtech materials engineering with specialization, bs in chemistry with specialization years , and phd programs. we also provide core and elective courses in chemistry and related fields for undergraduate btech engineering students. the department offers chemistry courses for -year integrated bsc-b.ed. program itep , which is in alignment with nep to support teacher preparation and foster professional development. besides teaching, the department is striving to be acknowledged for excellence in research and technology. our goal is to foster an environment where everyone can thrive, reach their full potential, and contribute to cutting-edge scientific advancements. we have the latest state of the art basic teaching laboratories and several thematic research laboratories. our current faculty strength is and they are carrying out research activities in all major areas of chemical sciences, namely, organic synthesis and catalysis, chemical biology, main group chemistry and organometallics, nanomaterials, spectroscopy and chemical dynamics, biophysical chemistry and computational chemistry. the cutting-edge research in the thrust areas by our faculty members are published in international peer-reviewed journals of well-repute. in short iit jodhpur chemistry department is where chemistry meets technology through collaboration, communication and cooperation. i encourage the future aspirants to get enrolled at iit jodhpur and wish you all the very best in your future endeavours. thank you. the thrust areas in which research is being actively carried are given below. quick links phd admission january apply now course type for online registration of msc program kb lhb booking cdif equipment booking department seminar hall booking external users: sample analysis services . mb latest news view all news samapika sahu, a research scholar under the supervision of prof. ananya debnath, has been awarded third prize in the chemical sciences category at the saransh thesis competition congratulations to dr sandip murarka for receiving the crsi bronze medal congratulations to dr sandip murarka on his appointment as an associate editor of rsc advances, a prestigious journal published by the royal society of chemistry rsc highlights view all highlights c-h alkylation of heterocycles via light-mediated palladium catalysis. s. senapati, s. k. hota, l. kloene, c. empel, s. murarka , and r. m. koenigs angew. chem. int. ed. , , e . light harvesting complex ii resists non-bilayer lipid-induced polymorphism in plant thylakoid membranes via lipid redistribution, avinash garg and ananya debnath, the journal of physical chemistry letters. . copper-photoredox-catalyzed divergent strategy for the site-selective arylation and alkylation of glycines and peptides. p. meher, m. s. prasad, k. r. thombare, and s. murarka acs catal. , , - . bench-stable low-valent chromium catalysts for hydrogenation of co , bicarbonate, and inorganic carbonates to formate. singh t.; gutal a.; regina a.; banerjee a.; paranjothy m.; chakraborty s.; acs catal. , , . doi: . acscatal. c designing a phenalenyl-based dinuclear ni ii complex: an electrocatalyst with two single ni sites for oxygen evolution reaction oer . kamboj, n. and metre, r. k. inorg. chem., , , - agarwala, p., pal, a., hazra, m. k., sasmal, d. k., differential mg deposition on dna holliday junctions dictates the rate and stability of conformational exchange just accepted in nanoscale , latest events view all events mar departmental seminar by prof. rene m koenigs jan navigating phd and beyond, iit jodhpur oct in-house symposium, chemmeet- important links cccd iitj recruitment correspondence rti tenders techscape contact old website nccr portal how to reach iitj institute repository donations web policy web information manager feedback cert-in help nirf internal committee intranet links copyright all rights reserved this portal is owned, designed, and developed by digital infrastructure automation , iit jodhpur. n.h. , nagaur road, karwar, jodhpur - , rajasthan india for any comments enquiries feedback, please email the wim . last updated : mar - : pm redirecttologinpage !!! arrow downward
chemical engineering iit jodhpur redirecttologinpage !!! welcome to the department of chemical engineering translation of molecular information into discovery of new products and processes with industry . vision mission of the department to become a globally recognized department of chemical engineering through its contribution in emerging and demand-driven areas with multidisciplinary approach. the department of chemical engineering offers under-graduate btech and post-graduate mtech, mtech-phd and phd programs in chemical engineering. through the academic programs, the department is making a conscious effort to establish itself as a leading institute in the new genre of chemical engineering education. the program involves traditional courses, emerging areas and specialisations such as process engineering intelligence, molecular engineering and sustainability. in line with the new education policy, btech chemical engineering students will have unique opportunity and flexibility for: minor in a management b entrepreneurship c data science five year btech mtech mba one year engineering innovation opportunity traditionally, chemical engineering teaching focuses on subjects like material and energy balance, transport phenomena, thermodynamics, mass transfer, heat transfer, fluid mechanics, chemical reaction engineering, numerical analysis, computational systems, biotechnology, petroleum-petrochemicals, polymers and safety engineering. with the advent of the era of industry . in chemical companies, artificial intelligence ai , machine learning ml , data analytics, internet of things iot , molecular engineering, nano-composites; the discipline is being transformed by the incorporation of new emerging technologies and demand-driven areas. the department is keen on collaboration with industry and academia worldwide. at present, chemical engineering department is sharing its expertise with the department of drinking water and sanitation ddws , ministry of jal shakti; defence research and development organisation drdo , ministry of defence; international atomic energy agency iaea etc. department has signed mou with the industries for providing consultancy services. department is also actively involved in scientific social responsibility ssr through unnat bharat abhiyan uba and other societal initiatives. department has research interest in core and emerging areas; and is looking for faculty members in different areas of chemical engineering. prospective candidates are encouraged to visit our recruitment page and apply. highlights view all highlights congratulations to dr. vikky anand, assistant professor, department of chemical engineering, iit jodhpur, for being honored as a young associate of inae for the year . . congratulations to prof pradip kumar tewari, professor, department of chemical engineering, iit jodhpur, for honoring with the prestigious lifetime achievement award .. congratulations to prof parag arvind deshpande, professor, department of chemical engineering, iit jodhpur, for honoring csi sistla kameswari young scientist award - .. latest news view all news provisionally selected candidates for the phd program january session selected candidates for the interview and written exam for admission to the phd jan workshop: open source molecular visualization techniques for researchers admission to phd program for autumn, - latest events view all events mar third edition of chem-e-sorption nov expert talk interactive session by prof rao r tummala on oct expert talk by prof. sunil bhagwat, director, iiser pune on important links cccd iitj recruitment correspondence rti tenders techscape contact old website nccr portal how to reach iitj institute repository donations web policy web information manager feedback cert-in help nirf internal committee intranet links copyright all rights reserved this portal is owned, designed, and developed by digital infrastructure automation , iit jodhpur. n.h. , nagaur road, karwar, jodhpur - , rajasthan india for any comments enquiries feedback, please email the wim . last updated : mar - : pm redirecttologinpage !!! arrow downward
civil and infrastructure engineering iit jodhpur redirecttologinpage !!! welcome to the civil and infrastructure engineering the rapidly urbanizing society and increasing quality of life demand reliable and intelligent infrastructure systems which are capable of catering to the societal needs at different scales from an individual to the community level. consequently, the civil and infrastructure industry has undergone profound changes and is constantly evolving. however, the new-age designs and innovations in the civil and infrastructure industry can only be driven by a group of engineering graduates having multidisciplinary training and a sound understanding of emerging technologies. the department of civil and infrastructure engineering, iit jodhpur esatablished in january . we started academics programs in the academic year - . the department offers unique programs that incorporate and integrate the elements of conventional civil engineering with advanced transformative technologies such as artificial intelligence ai , cyber-physical-systems cps , digital twins dt , and automated management and information systems. additionally, a major thrust is also planned on the design, implementation, and maintenance of large-scale integrated infrastructure systems across different domains. the focus areas of the department are : energy and environment building sciences, safety, and services applications of ai, iot and cps in civil and infrastructure engineering smart and integrated infrastructure urban architecture and planning construction technology and management transportation engineering structural engineering geotechnical engineering water resources engineering engineering geology vision the department strives to be an internationally renowned centre of excellence in education, research, and innovation with a major focus on sustainability and digitalization of infrastructure. missions develop unique courses in the field of civil and infrastructure engineering through advanced ug and pg programs with a multidisciplinary perspective. establish high quality teaching and research facilities in the areas of smart, resilient, and sustainable infrastructure engineering to foster the needs of society. promote consilient research through application of ai ml, cyber-physical-systems, digital twin and advanced visualization in the areas of energy, environment, transportation, and construction. promote innovative and entrepreneurial activities through intellectual property generation and transfer. nurture the potential of students to become future leaders in the civil engineering industry for leadership achievements, scientific breakthroughs and social welfare. quick access department brochure . mb academic calendar iitj at a glance english iitj at a glance hindi highlights view all highlights congratulation to prof. subhasish dey for publishing a research paper titled hydrodynamics of turbulent flow in channels with submerged flexible vegetation canopy in physics of fluid, volume : is congratulations to dr. sreejith krishnan for publishing a research article titled co-calcination of kaolinitic clay and green liquor dregs to produce supplementary cementitious materials in journal congratulation to prof. subhasish dey for publishing a research paper titled effects of u-burrow bioirrigation on turbulence characteristics in journal of hydraulic research congratulations to mr. abhishek jain and his supervisor, dr. debanjan guha roy, and co-supervisor dr. trishikhi raychoudhury for publishing an article titled comparative efficacy of raw and modified congratulation to prof. subhasish dey for publishing a research paper titled shallow water hydrodynamics: surge propagation and sill-controlled flows in physics of fluids vol. , issue congratulations to mr. shahiq ahmad wani and his supervisor, dr. ranju mohan, for publishing an article titled digital payment adoption in public transportation: mediating role of mode choice segment congratulation to prof. subhasish dey for publishing a research paper titled the universal two-thirds law of pipeline scour in physics of fluid, volume : issue congratulation to prof. subhasish dey for publishing a research paper titled hydrodynamics of a rigid submerged vegetated flow in physics of fluid, volume : issue news newsletter view all news phd admissions result ay - semester ii dec shortlisted candidates for written test and or interview of phd program ay - sem ii phd admission re-open announcement list of candidates provisionally shortlisted for mtech-part time online program bridge engineering result of phd admissions second round, ay - semester i july latest events view all events mar one-day workshop on sustainability of cement and concrete in the indian context jul congratulations dr. bhupendra for serb international research experience sire for the year - jan a indo-uk workshop on design of foundation systems for offshore wind turbines - indian perspective important links cccd iitj recruitment correspondence rti tenders techscape contact old website nccr portal how to reach iitj institute repository donations web policy web information manager feedback cert-in help nirf internal committee intranet links copyright all rights reserved this portal is owned, designed, and developed by digital infrastructure automation , iit jodhpur. n.h. , nagaur road, karwar, jodhpur - , rajasthan india for any comments enquiries feedback, please email the wim . last updated : mar - : am redirecttologinpage !!! arrow downward
computer science engineering iit jodhpur redirecttologinpage !!! welcome to the department of computer science engineering computer science and engineering, today, plays a major role in transforming every aspect of human life - in addressing social challenges and catalyzing the ongoing wave of the industrial revolution. the department is driven by its commitment to excel in next generation technology development and research. our mission is to strengthen industry-academia collaborations and prepare our students to contribute to multi-disciplinary projects and r d for solving problems of national interest. vision to be among the top departments in terms of research contributions, practical impact, and applications of computer science and engineering in the country in the next years, and internationally well known in some focused areas in the next years. some of our missions are to achieve excellence in research in fundamental as well as applied areas of cse and allied subject for innovative discoveries; develop an academic ecosystem by collaborating; and develop and support the notion of computing for all across disciplines at the institute. mission our missions are to achieve excellence in research in fundamental as well as applied areas of cse and allied subject for innovative discoveries; develop an academic ecosystem by collaborating; and develop and support the notion of computing for all across disciplines at the institute. m achieving excellence in research in fundamental as well as applied areas of cse and allied subjects for innovative discoveries. m develop an academic ecosystem by collaborating within the institute, as well by means of international, national and regional institutes. the collaborations may be fostered by research visits, collaborative projects, joint thesis, internship guidance, research mentoring etc. m develop and support the notion of computing for all across disciplines at the institute. m embracing shared dialogue across disciplines and encouraging experiential learning to redefine the contours of traditional computer science teaching and learning. be one of the leading departments in the country for hybrid cse education. m define and solve real-world problems in collaboration with industry, and develop industry- connect by means of research grants consultancies, and collaborative projects. develop start-up ecosystem in emerging areas of computing in collaboration with other departments at iit jodhpur. m dissemination of knowledge without physical boundaries, i.e. classroom, online and other modes of teaching, to create a workforce which is ready to ethically solve technological challenges of the next generation. m provide thought leadership in public policy and ethics of emerging computing technologies towards building an equitable and ethical society. news events view all news dr. debasis das received the dst-nsf project award , national science foundation nsf , usa, and the department of science and technology dst of india. dr. debasis das received nstc research award- , national science and technology council nstc , taiwan, national sun yat-sen university nsysu , taiwan. swapnil thatte, paromita banerjee, mayank vatsa, richa singh, bhanu duggal, angshuman paul submitted an indian patent on mfa-u-net: u-net with multi-level feature aggregation for scale-free medical image segmentation funded by tih ihub drishti. highlights view all highlights patientvlm meets docvlm: pre-consultation dialogue between vision-language models for efficient diagnosis, aaai :k lokesh, uday agarwal, abhirama subramanyam penamakuri, apoorva challa, shreya k g temporal object-aware vision transformer for few-shot video object detection, aaai : yogesh kumar, anand mishra dbcoreset: a density-based coreset algorithm for computationally efficient chest x-ray diagnosis, the ieee international symposium on biomedical imaging isbi : jayant mahawar, angshuman paul announcements view all announcements phd admission result ay - semester ii list of shortlisted candidates for phd ay - semester-ii list of provisionally shortlisted candidates for admission to the phd program july pdf provisionally shortlisted and waitlisted candidates for mtech cse ai july- rolling advertisement for admission to phd program. program details rolling advertisement for faculty positions. important links cccd iitj recruitment correspondence rti tenders techscape contact old website nccr portal how to reach iitj institute repository donations web policy web information manager feedback cert-in help nirf internal committee intranet links copyright all rights reserved this portal is owned, designed, and developed by digital infrastructure automation , iit jodhpur. n.h. , nagaur road, karwar, jodhpur - , rajasthan india for any comments enquiries feedback, please email the wim . last updated : mar - : pm redirecttologinpage !!! arrow downward
electrical engineering iit jodhpur redirecttologinpage !!! welcome to the department of electrical engineering the department of electrical engineering primarily focuses on imparting quality education and preparing students to face future technological challenges. the vision of the department is to enhance the research environment and to innovate in pedagogy to address the challenges of socio-economic and human resource development. the department is committed to engage in high-quality research by faculty members and students, and in the pursuit of excellence in teaching. the department offers btech in electrical engineering with broad range of major and minor specializations and three state-of-the-art mtech programs in sensors and internet of things siot , cyber physical systems cps , and intelligent communication systems ics . the department also runs dual degree mtech phd programs in intelligent communication systems, sensors and internet of things siot and cyber physical systems cps as well as phd program with a broad range of specializations covering detailed aspects of microelectronics, signal processing, communication, microwave photonics, power systems, control systems etc. the department is also starting a new executive mtech program in intelligent vlsi systems for working professionals from july . the prospective undergraduate and postgraduate students are encouraged to visit the academic programs ug program, pg programs and doctoral programs page of the department to know more about the details of courses offered in the department. to know more about the current research themes of the faculty members, the prospective students are encouraged to visit the research overview page of the department. technology tracks currently pursued by the department include emerging and challenging fields that culminate at the intersection of several traditional research areas. current technology tracks active collaboration is on-going with organizations like freescale semiconductors, global foundries, aiims jodhpur, dst, drdo, and isro, to name a few. the department has been attracting various sponsored projects from r d organizations since its inception. consolidated year-wise cutoffs of last four years download file: kb highlights view all highlights dr. saakshi dhanekar, associate professor in department of electrical engineering, iit jodhpur published a manuscript in the chemical engineering journal impact factor phd student mr. prabhanshu yadav won the best paper award in ieee international conference on advanced networks and telecommunications systems dr. akshay moudgil awarded teaching excellence award latest news view all news result of phd admissions ay - semester ii consolidated year-wise cutoffs of last four years list of candidates shortlisted for phd admission, nd round, ay - , semester-i latest event view all events mar skill development program on matlab simulink and software-defined radio sdr ... dec skill development program on matlab simulink and software-defined radio sdr -based communication systems design st - th december feb vlsi test workshop : the program is intended for the faculty, ug, and pg students, research scholars, practicing engineers, and people from r d in the field of vlsi design. apr expert talk by prof. h.m. gupta on: evolution of icts: historical and indian context apr invited talk by mr. tapas nandy: cycle of inter-chip communication: past-present-future important links cccd iitj recruitment correspondence rti tenders techscape contact old website nccr portal how to reach iitj institute repository donations web policy web information manager feedback cert-in help nirf internal committee intranet links copyright all rights reserved this portal is owned, designed, and developed by digital infrastructure automation , iit jodhpur. n.h. , nagaur road, karwar, jodhpur - , rajasthan india for any comments enquiries feedback, please email the wim . last updated : mar - : pm redirecttologinpage !!! arrow downward
mathematics iit jodhpur redirecttologinpage !!! welcome to the department of mathematics mathematics, being the basis of many disciplines, is a subject that evolves with time and creates new theories to solve real-world challenging problems. our department has been taking a leading role in developing new methods to model such situations that can be used in diverse areas of computer science, engineering, and basic sciences. the department has faculty with research interests in the areas of algebra, mathematical physics, scientific computation, numerical analysis, partial differential equations, topological dynamics, low dimensional chaos, dynamical systems, renormalization in low-dimensional dynamics, wavelet analysis, fractional transform theory, image processing, financial risk analysis, categorical data analysis, reliability theory, applied probability. we are excited to offer high-quality programs at postgraduate level for students who wish to apply math to science or engineering such as a two-year msc program in mathematics, a four-year msc-mtech program in mathematics-data and computational sciences, a two year mtech program in data and computational sciences. we also offer an mtech-phd dual degree program in data and computational sciences and a phd program with specialization in different areas of mathematics to those who wish to earn a deeper understanding of pure and applied mathematics. workshop on lean list of provisionally shortlisted candidates for phd entrance examination for semester ii of - th international conference on nonlinear applied analysis and optimization icnaao - from the head of the department welcome to the department of mathematics!! the department of mathematics is dedicated to advancing the fields of pure mathematics, applied mathematics and statistics. our vision is to emphasize both the fundamental principles of core mathematics and the foundational concepts essential for analyzing key principles applied in cutting-edge technologies. since its establishment, the department has been actively engaged in research across various critical areas of mathematics and computing. the department also aimed to explore modern aspects of mathematics coupled with computational capabilities to develop a workforce specialized in mathematical aspects of key technologies. with this inclination, the department initiated academic programs to address the mathematical needs of both industry and academia. currently, we offer various programmes, namely, a two-year msc program in mathematics, a four-year msc-mtech program in mathematics-data and computational sciences, a two year mtech program in data and computational sciences.... read more: head message latest events view all events mar invited talk by dr. sushil bhunia on th march, at : pm feb research seminar by dr abhishek kumar singh on feb , jan invited talk by prof. basant lal sharma on january at pm announcement view all announcement phd admission results semester-ii, ay - merit list of provisionally shortlisted candidates for phd admission... list of provisionally shortlisted candidates for phd entrance examination for semester ii.... latest news view all news workshop on lean the department of mathematics is organizing an introductory workshop on the lean proof assistant from th to th february. th international conference on nonlinear applied analysis and optimization icnaao- th international conference on nonlinear applied analysis and optimization icnaao- afs-i - annual foundation school - i iit jodhpur afs-i - annual foundation school - i iit jodhpur highlights view all highlights nonlinear coupled-mode framework for coupled systems: from exact hamiltonian models to improved reduced-order formulations general casorati inequalities and implications for riemannian maps and riemannian submersions congratulation to dr kiran meena for published of research paper important links cccd iitj recruitment correspondence rti tenders techscape contact old website nccr portal how to reach iitj institute repository donations web policy web information manager feedback cert-in help nirf internal committee intranet links copyright all rights reserved this portal is owned, designed, and developed by digital infrastructure automation , iit jodhpur. n.h. , nagaur road, karwar, jodhpur - , rajasthan india for any comments enquiries feedback, please email the wim . last updated : mar - : pm redirecttologinpage !!! arrow downward
mechanical engineering iit jodhpur redirecttologinpage !!! welcome to the department of mechanical engineering the department of mechanical engineering at iit jodhpur is devoted to quality engineering education and pursuits the excellence in research. it is dedicated to preparing students to face the emerging challenges faced by society. the vision of the department is to translate its research and to innovate in pedagogy to enable ignited young minds to find technological solutions for upcoming challenges. the department offers b. tech. m. tech. and phd in mechanical engineering within three major domains of thermofluids, design, and smart manufacturing. the students also have the opportunity to work with an interdisciplinary specialization in emerging areas such as artificial intelligence ai , internet of things iot , smart healthcare, and cyber-physical systems cps . at iit jodhpur, mechanical engineers are educated in a way not only to adapt but to define direct change. this is reflected in the portfolio of the current activities of the department. faculty members are involved in a wide range of projects in the areas of energy conversion and power systems, heat transfer and fluid mechanics, mechanics of solid, mechanical vibrations, robotics, autonomous unmanned vehicles, design optimization, acoustics and noise control, control systems, rotor dynamics, nanomaterials, biomechanics, bio-inspired thermo-fluids, fluid-structure interaction, etc. to name a few. additionally, efforts are being made to introduce advanced concepts like smart manufacturing, industry .o, smart scientific computing techniques, high-performance computing, applications of artificial intelligence, machine learning algorithms, sensors, and iot as a part of solving interdisciplinary problems requiring mechanical engineering know-how. keeping a balance between theory and hands-on experience, the department intends to provide its students with a solid foundation in core as well as emerging areas of mechanical engineering by inspiring critical thinking and nurturing problem-solving skills. the department has active collaborations with aiims jodhpur, general electric, thermax, drdo, isro, tcs innovation lab, tvs motor company to name a few. the department has been attracting various sponsored projects from r d organizations since its inception. technology tracks smart manufacturing and industry . multiscale manufacturing processing of novel materials fluid thermal system design multiphase flows energy and sustainability solid mechanics and design vibration and acoustics robotics and mobility systems aerodynamics various tracks mechanical engineering building latest news view all news list of shortlisted candidates for the written test interview for phd, ay - semester ii jan the department of mechanical engineering, iit jodhpur, invites applications for the phd program for the semester commencing in july application deadline june list of candidates shortlisted for written test and interview for mtech in drone and anti-drone technologies admissions under different categories highlights view all highlights thermofluids engineering the thermofluids engineering division focuses on research in fluid dynamics, heat transfer, energy systems, multiphase flow... mechanical design the mechanical design section focuses on cutting-edge research and development in the following research areas... manufacturing the manufacturing section focuses on innovative research and technological advancements in the following research areas... latest events view all events jul air advances in robotics th international conference of the robotics society dec isme international conference on recent advances in mechanical engineering dec raise- recent advances in sustainable energy dec fmfp- conference: the th international and th national conference dec the th national and th international ihmtc- conference important links cccd iitj recruitment correspondence rti tenders techscape contact old website nccr portal how to reach iitj institute repository donations web policy web information manager feedback cert-in help nirf internal committee intranet links copyright all rights reserved this portal is owned, designed, and developed by digital infrastructure automation , iit jodhpur. n.h. , nagaur road, karwar, jodhpur - , rajasthan india for any comments enquiries feedback, please email the wim . last updated : mar - : pm redirecttologinpage !!! arrow downward
materials engineering iit jodhpur redirecttologinpage !!! welcome to the department of materials engineering the department of materials engineering at iit jodhpur was established in , and the department is committed to high-quality education and research in the broad area of materials engineering. the department continuously strives for excellence in teaching and research through innovative pedagogy and curriculum, by undertaking interdisciplinary projects, and through active collaborations with industries, r d labs, and academia. by enabling the students to think independently and equipping them with relevant skill sets, our goal is to encourage the graduates to innovate and address present-day materials challenges to meet the needs of the country. at present, the department offers btech, mtech, and phd programs. the department's teaching and research activities cover four major streams- structural materials, functional materials, computational materials engineering, and process metallurgy. from structural materials to semiconductors, we attempt to understand the processing, composition and structure, properties, and performance of materials for deriving novel, effective, and sustainable alternatives. currently, efforts are being made to introduce advanced concepts such as smart materials, additive manufacturing, artificial intelligence and machine learning, sensor materials, etc., as a part of solving interdisciplinary problems requiring materials engineering knowledge. department building image head of the department the department of materials engineering at iit jodhpur is working towards building future generation minds rich in skills and innovation to be the best in the outside world. faculty members in the department have expertise in diverse areas of materials engineering. they are actively involved in conducting translational research in the fundamental and applied areas of materials engineering. the department frequently organizes invited lectures and workshops to share research findings, train students on the state-of-the-art experimental and computational techniques to promote the development of skill sets. the department welcomes bright people who aspire to utilize the power of ambitious research and teaching to shape a better future. materials design and processing advanced structural and functional materials computational materials engineering extractive and process metallurgy materials testing and characterization highlights view all highlights shahzad ahmed has been honored with the best oral presentation award at the nd international conference on materials science and engineering imaging atomic-scale magnetism with energy-filtered differential phase contrast method abir bhattacharyya awarded early career research award ecra latest news view all news phd result of ay - , semester ii shortlisted candidates for the phd written test interview for semester ii of - admission to phd programme, ay - semester i round- admission to phd programme, ay - semester i: shortlisting of candidates ... list of provisionally selected phd candidates, ay - semester i ay - semester i phd admissions round ii mme latest event view all events jan department organized a presentation on material's future by prof. indranil chattoraj jan department organized a presentation on sustainability of metal structures via spray clad remanufacturing by prof. sanjay sampath dec department organized a -day workshop on advances in additive manufacturing d printing nov department organized an orientation session for the undergraduate students important links cccd iitj recruitment correspondence rti tenders techscape contact old website nccr portal how to reach iitj institute repository donations web policy web information manager feedback cert-in help nirf internal committee intranet links copyright all rights reserved this portal is owned, designed, and developed by digital infrastructure automation , iit jodhpur. n.h. , nagaur road, karwar, jodhpur - , rajasthan india for any comments enquiries feedback, please email the wim . last updated : nov - : pm redirecttologinpage !!! arrow downward
physics iit jodhpur redirecttologinpage !!! welcome to the department of physics the subject of physics is inherently a natural science subject based on strong theoretical foundations and experimental findings. the subject closely intersects with almost all the branches of engineering and the current research activities of physics across the world made a huge impact on new, advanced, and emerging technologies. keeping these facts into consideration, our department is committed to imparting high-quality education based on a strong academic curriculum comprising elements of theoretical concepts, laboratory experiments, and most importantly hands-on experiments. the graduates of the department are expected to have deep insight into the domain of physics together with a strong bent of mind to pursue cutting-edge research and translate it into technology. we offer a broad range of undergraduate and postgraduate programs. our year bs in physics with specialization is a technology-oriented science program and offers specialization in physics-based emerging technology domains. the program also has the flexibility to convert into a year bs mtech dual degree course. at the postgraduate level, we have four-degree programs viz. msc years , msc-mtech dual degree in physics and materials engineering. the dual degree program also has additional two specializations namely functional materials and computational materials engineering. finally, our phd program empowers scholars to pursue research in various domains. research areas the department has a very good blend of highly qualified young and experienced faculty members in the areas of advanced physics. the department is also equipped with a number of thematic laboratories which enable the students to carry out high-end and impactful theoretical and applied research in the following focus areas: research areas high energy physics and astrophysics theoretical research in domains; flavour physics, astrophysics, particle physics, cosmology, and dark matter and dark energy. experimental research in flavor physics with the belle ii experiment. quantum physics open quantum systems, theoretical and experimental aspects of quantum optics quantum information, quantum field theory, quantum statistical mechanics and quantum cosmology. condensed matter and plasma physics group experimental and theoretical research on molecular electronics, organic electronics, cold plasma technologies and applications, energy storage, solar cells, light emitting diodes, solar water splitting, soft matters, statistical physics, computational physics, multiscale modelling, phase ordering dynamics, glasses, amorphous solids, polymers and solid electrolyte materials, physics of living matter, active matter physics, functional materials, materials design and engineering, nanomagnetism and multiferroics. optics and photonics theoretical and experimental research in nano photonics, light in disordered media, ultrafast optics, nonlinear optics, topological singularities, specially optical fibers, photonic sensors, time dynamic systems, terahertz generation and application, transient and steady-state spectroscopy, bound state in the continuum, disorder photons and light matter interaction and ceramic materials for high energy laser applications. candidates interested in pursuing phd, please go through the research groups and visit the individual faculty's home pages . the application can be submitted with this link . infrastructure the department is equipped with high-end research equipment which includes squid magnetometer, physical property measurement systems ppms , raman spectrometer, and scanning tunnelling microscope stm besides a host of other advanced characterization equipment which is available at the centre for research development of scientific instruments crdsi . collaborations the department is having close collaboration with a number of national and international agencies including drdo, isro, dae, csir, dst, and serb. department faculties also have collaborations with various institutes of national and international repute, namely tifr, iit bombay, iit gandhinagar, iit bhu, central university of rajasthan, university of montreal, canada, university of warsaw poland, brookhaven national laboratory usa, eth zurich switzerland, imem parma italy, infn turino, italy, cmu pittsburgh usa, belle ii kek japan etc. our social media connect contact numbers for new students for any queries regarding registration, accessing facilities etc.. phone numbers: - - office of physics highlights view all highlights prof. ram prakash from the department of physics, iit jodhpur has been elected as the president of the plasma science society of india mr.shubham chamola has received the prestigious commonwealth fellowship to work at the university of cambridge, uk for a duration of one year nov -oct dr. yogeshwar nath mishra has co-invented the world s fastest single-shot wide-field microscope with his collaborators at nasa-caltech in usa and fau in germany. they published their work in the journ jitendra yadav has received the galileo galilei poster award at the international symposium on beyond li-ion batteries held in padova, italy sept - , . phd students, sipra mohapatra and hema teherpuria, have been awarded the prestigious aps travel grant and best poster award for hema at ccp our phd student miss surbhi ramawat has received the best poster award with a cash prize of - euro in one of the globally renowned conference on thermoelectric materials. latest news view all news phd admissions in physics ay - semester-ii dec list of candidates for phd admission - academic year - semester i list of shortlisted candidates for phd admission ay - , department of physics seminars meetings view all events feb diving deep into physics seminar series : quantum superposition, entanglement, and applications by prof. natthi lal.. jan departmental seminar : thin film devices on conventional and green substrates by dr. deepa bhatt, noi techpark, free univ.. jan diving deep into physics colloquium series: from empirical to machine learning potentials: modeling liqu.. dec diving deep into physics colloquium series: . m dot and energetic cosmic transients by dr. shashi bhushan pandey.. nov diving deep into physics colloquium series: the amazing world of gravitational wave from binary neutron star merger by prof. ritam.. important links cccd iitj recruitment correspondence rti tenders techscape contact old website nccr portal how to reach iitj institute repository donations web policy web information manager feedback cert-in help nirf internal committee intranet links copyright all rights reserved this portal is owned, designed, and developed by digital infrastructure automation , iit jodhpur. n.h. , nagaur road, karwar, jodhpur - , rajasthan india for any comments enquiries feedback, please email the wim . last updated : feb - : pm redirecttologinpage !!! arrow downward
programs indian institute of technology jodhpur iit jodhpur redirecttologinpage !!! bachelor of technology bs program master of technology master of science doctor of philosophy integrated teacher education programme itep executive programs mba masters of design summer undergraduate research at jodhpur suraj important links cccd iitj recruitment correspondence rti tenders techscape contact old website nccr portal how to reach iitj institute repository donations web policy web information manager feedback cert-in help nirf internal committee intranet links copyright all rights reserved this portal is owned, designed, and developed by digital infrastructure automation , iit jodhpur. n.h. , nagaur road, karwar, jodhpur - , rajasthan india for any comments enquiries feedback, please email the wim . arrow downward
office of executive education iit jodhpur redirecttologinpage !!! welcome to the office of executive education: a transformative odyssey for visionary trailblazers pioneering learning frontiers dynamic, forward-thinking programs meticulously crafted to empower professionals with the acumen and foresight to spearhead innovation. helmed by iit jodhpur s esteemed faculty and industry luminaries, our courses seamlessly weave groundbreaking research with practical applications, honing critical thinking and strategic mastery. comprehensive empowerment tailored for ambitious professionals, our executive education offerings present an adaptable learning ecosystem spanning in-person, online, and hybrid modalities. participants thrive in an intellectually stimulating milieu, fortified by seamless administrative facilitation and unparalleled access to cutting-edge resources, ensuring a profoundly enriching and frictionless educational voyage. enduring alliances transcending conventional academia, our programs foster deep-rooted professional synergies. enrolees become part of an illustrious nexus of industry stalwarts, visionaries, and policymakers, paving the way for transformative collaborations and unparalleled career avenues. purposeful heterogeneity we convene a confluence of professionals hailing from myriad sectors, regions, and disciplines, catalysing a rich tapestry of intellectual exchange. this cultivated diversity fortifies leadership prowess, augments cross-sector problem-solving, and equips participants to adeptly navigate the labyrinth of contemporary global challenges. vision to make iit jodhpur a leading indian institute offering world-class executive education for working professionals and other aspirants. mission to provide well curated programmes in line with industry requirements. provide opportunity to learners via both offline and online modes. develop partnership with online edu service providers the best in the business . draw industry s attention to iitj s academic activities. provide up-to-date insights and knowledge to participants. gain access to ongoing and upcoming industry practices. industry connect and participate in industry meet. generate revenue streams. executive programmes structure at a glance: executive mtech programs: credits credit contact hours . executive postgraduate diploma: credits. executive postgraduate certificate: - credits. executive mba programs: credits. executive undergraduate programs: year : certification credits , year : diploma credits , year : bsc degree credits , year : bs degree credits . the senate of the institute has formulated a set of guidelines and rules to ensure high standard of performance as well as for smooth functioning of the academic programmes. within this broad set of guidelines, subject to the approval of the senate, different programmes can include additional academic requirements as deemed necessary for that programme. these academic programmes are continuously monitored by the senate and make appropriate modifications improvements as and when necessary. important links cccd iitj recruitment correspondence rti tenders techscape contact old website nccr portal how to reach iitj institute repository donations web policy web information manager feedback cert-in help nirf internal committee intranet links copyright all rights reserved this portal is owned, designed, and developed by digital infrastructure automation , iit jodhpur. n.h. , nagaur road, karwar, jodhpur - , rajasthan india for any comments enquiries feedback, please email the wim . last updated : mar - : pm redirecttologinpage !!! arrow downward
bachelor of technology iit jodhpur redirecttologinpage !!! btech programmes at iit jodhpur iit jodhpur offers eight btech programmes, namely, . btech bioscience bioengineering . btech computer science engineering . btech electrical engineering . btech mechanical engineering . btech ai and data science . btech chemical engineering . btech materials engineering . btech civil and infrastructure engineering . btech electronics engineering for details of curriculum please visit the page and program structure click here . undergraduate programmes of iitj: curriculum for a global engineer indian institute of technology jodhpur is committed to educational excellence through a strong student-focused educational experience and to provide quality education with the contemporary and highly professional curricula. in order to achieve this objective, iit jodhpur has undergone thorough curriculum change in the year and came up with a new curriculum. this article highlights philosophy ingrained in the new curriculum and some salient features. the societal challenges of the st century are profound and wide-ranging. basic needs such as energy, food and water, housing, mobility, and health will become even more acute as the world population exceeds billion. the demands for sustainable development will require redefined and innovative engineering talent and leadership. the emergence of a connected, competitive, and entrepreneurial global economy, in which successful engineers increasingly need technical competency and professional skills that differ from what worked in the past. these reasons build up a clear case for disruptive revision of the undergraduate curriculum. some of the attributes expected of modern engineers are: . flexibility to understand and manage rapidly evolving technologies; . ability to identify, define as well as solve problems; . proficiency in theory and applications; . skill for handling out-of-the-box engineering challenges; . capable of creative thinking; . experience of entrepreneurship; . understanding of public policy implications. today the creative function of engineering is expected to be viewed and understood in the broader context of the new patterns of knowledge creation across disciplines obliterating traditional boundaries between science, humanities and social sciences, arts and engineering. iit jodhpur has pursued a newer structure of programmes in addition to classical programmes to address these opportunities. objectives the objective of the new curriculum is to define a novel instructional paradigm and content plan to address modern demands of professional education as outlined above based upon the philosophy of outcome-based education. the curriculum builds on four guiding principles of outcome-based academic, i.e., . all students can learn and succeed but maybe not on the same day or in the same way . each success by a student breeds more success success must open up the opportunity of more success . academic institutions create and nurture the conditions of success . the academic system acknowledges and respects challenging initiatives without fear of failure. unique features of the ug curriculum unique features of the undergraduate curriculum are highlighted next: the curriculum emphasized the fundamentals of basic and engineering sciences to enable learners to have a broader multi-disciplinary perspective for the specialisation being pursued. departmental courses focus on fundamental scientific principles behind technologies. avenues created for pursuing co-curricular and extra-curricular creative interests as an integral component of the curricular content by introducing nongraded courses on social connect, performing arts, and communication skills. as an outcome of these pursuits, a student is expected to improve their capacity to imagine and to build up enthusiasm to pursue unknown territories through purely creative ventures. early design courses are introduced which focus more heavily on conceptual design methods and less on discipline-specific artefacts. these courses teach that design is open-ended; that there are numerous engineering challenges beyond domains of traditional disciplines, and that students could begin to think and work like engineers. avenues created for making students continuously engaged in these intellectual processes throughout the curriculum and at an increasingly sophisticated level through design credits. such continual integrative experiences help students to expand and deepen their internal knowledge structure of the discipline, which will aid their eventual retrieval and use. opportunities and challenges continue to require engineers to literally invent the future by developing breakthrough technologies that solve global problems and enhance the quality of life. entrepreneurship education has been introduced in the curriculum as a minor which gives them solid experience in product design and development, prototyping, technology trends, and market analysis options of department area specialisation and five-year btech mtech allows students to pursue in-depth study of the topics of interest belonging to the programme. department area specialization in engineering innovation has also been introduced with the aim of making students industry ready by offering five months practical project jointly with an industry or r d organization. students get real-world experience working for an industry or r d organization on a project that complements their academic experience. with the rapid change in the contours of engineering education due to emergence of miniaturization, parallelism, smart materials, bio-mimetic systems, ai and cognitive systems, the role of engineering institute is not only preparing students in their major areas of study but also on other skills to encourage interdisciplinary teams to address challenges faced by the society. the emphasis has been laid on the development of technical skills in interdisciplinary areas and upcoming fields by introducing various interdisciplinary specializations such as ai, cps, iot, robotics, smart healthcare, etc. with evolving patterns of knowledge creation across disciplines and obliterating traditional boundaries between science and engineering, a capability linked double btech with second degree in engineering science is introduced to pursue newer structures of programmes in addition to classical programmes to provide ability to apply diverse knowledge and skills flexibly in novel situations. with changing paradigms of evaluation and assessment, the performance of students in a course is evaluated not only thorough examinations but also on a continuous basis which include but not limited to interaction in the classroom interaction, quizzes, assignments, tutorials, laboratory work, term papers and projects. technology-enabled aids have been assimilated into continuation evaluation as an integrated component. the finer granularity in grading has been introduced to allow for more precise and fairer grading, provide a more reliable indication of student performance, and give students a better opportunity to improve their grades. throughout the curriculum efforts have been laid down at building up strong foundation, enabling continuous learning, inter-disciplinary breadth, design thinking, imbibing creative and critical thinking, social responsibility and professional ethics, and sustainability as distinct thematic commitment. important links cccd iitj recruitment correspondence rti tenders techscape contact old website nccr portal how to reach iitj institute repository donations web policy web information manager feedback cert-in help nirf internal committee intranet links copyright all rights reserved this portal is owned, designed, and developed by digital infrastructure automation , iit jodhpur. n.h. , nagaur road, karwar, jodhpur - , rajasthan india for any comments enquiries feedback, please email the wim . last updated : jan - : am redirecttologinpage !!! arrow downward
b.s. office of academics affairs iit jodhpur redirecttologinpage !!! b.s. new bs programs s.no. program name action bs physics with specialization view bs chemistry with specialization view important links cccd iitj recruitment correspondence rti tenders techscape contact old website nccr portal how to reach iitj institute repository donations web policy web information manager feedback cert-in help nirf internal committee intranet links copyright all rights reserved this portal is owned, designed, and developed by digital infrastructure automation , iit jodhpur. n.h. , nagaur road, karwar, jodhpur - , rajasthan india for any comments enquiries feedback, please email the wim . last updated : mar - : am redirecttologinpage !!! arrow downward
master of technology iit jodhpur redirecttologinpage !!! master of technology programs . mtech bioscience bioengineering . mtech computer science engineering . mtech artificial intelligence . mtech cyber physical systems . mtech sensors and internet of things discontinue from ay - . mtech data and computational sciences . mtech advanced manufacturing and design . mtech thermofluids engineering . mtech materials engineering . mtech chemical engineering . mtech environmental engineering . mtech energy infrastructure . m. tech communication systems . mtech ar vr . robotics . quantum technologies . bridge engineering . drone and anti-drone technologies important links cccd iitj recruitment correspondence rti tenders techscape contact old website nccr portal how to reach iitj institute repository donations web policy web information manager feedback cert-in help nirf internal committee intranet links copyright all rights reserved this portal is owned, designed, and developed by digital infrastructure automation , iit jodhpur. n.h. , nagaur road, karwar, jodhpur - , rajasthan india for any comments enquiries feedback, please email the wim . last updated : jan - : pm redirecttologinpage !!! arrow downward
master of science iit jodhpur redirecttologinpage !!! master of science programs . msc chemistry . msc mathematics . msc physics . msc digital humanities . msc computational social science important links cccd iitj recruitment correspondence rti tenders techscape contact old website nccr portal how to reach iitj institute repository donations web policy web information manager feedback cert-in help nirf internal committee intranet links copyright all rights reserved this portal is owned, designed, and developed by digital infrastructure automation , iit jodhpur. n.h. , nagaur road, karwar, jodhpur - , rajasthan india for any comments enquiries feedback, please email the wim . last updated : jun - : pm redirecttologinpage !!! arrow downward
doctor of philosophy iit jodhpur redirecttologinpage !!! doctor of philosophy programs core sciences . phd chemistry . phd mathematics . phd physics engineering sciences . phd biosciences and bioengineering . phd computer science engineering . phd electrical engineering . phd mechanical engineering . phd metallurgical materials engineering . phd chemical engineering . phd civil and infrastructure engineering inter-disciplinary areas . phd robotics and mobility systems . phd digital humanities . phd quantum information and computation . phd smart healthcare . phd space science technologies schools phd school of artificial intelligence and data science phd school of liberal arts phd management and entrepreneurship phd schools of design centers . phd center for emerging technologies for sustainable development -cetsd . phd center for education technology -cet . phd center for mathematical and computational economics . phd center for internet of things iot applications . phd rishabh center for research and innovation in clean energy . phd center for technology foresight and policy important links cccd iitj recruitment correspondence rti tenders techscape contact old website nccr portal how to reach iitj institute repository donations web policy web information manager feedback cert-in help nirf internal committee intranet links copyright all rights reserved this portal is owned, designed, and developed by digital infrastructure automation , iit jodhpur. n.h. , nagaur road, karwar, jodhpur - , rajasthan india for any comments enquiries feedback, please email the wim . last updated : feb - : am redirecttologinpage !!! arrow downward
integrated teacher education programme iit jodhpur redirecttologinpage !!! welcome to the integrated teacher education programme the integrated teacher education programme itep , as envisioned by the national education policy, , offers a unique opportunity for the iit ecosystem as a whole to directly contribute to shaping the next generation of leaders. iit jodhpur is proud to announce the commencement of itep bsc-bed for secondary stage with major in physics, chemistry, and mathematics from . the secondary stage classes ix to xii , which represents a critical point of transition between school and higher education, deserves special attention in the indian context. the significant challenges at this stage include the issue of retaining students in the school system, streaming them according to their innate potential and interests, and preparing them to acquire the necessary technological and discipline specific exposure for future academic and career choices. the jodhpur model of teacher education envisions the all-round development of the graduate teacher for the secondary stage who will have i strong technological, pedagogical and content knowledge ii motivation for self-improvement and self-organization iii commitment to constitutional values and fundamental duties iv strong ethics and values v passion and drive for innovation in teaching vi effective communication skills vii dedication to lifelong learning, and viii empathy for students and commitment to their well-being. proposed jodhpur model of teacher education: vision of the all-round development of a graduate teacher for the secondary stage applications for the ncet examination are open from february to march . for more information, visit message from the director prof. avinash kumar agarwal director, iit jodhpur greetings from iit jodhpur! the most significant challenge for the transformation of school education is the absence of qualified and competent teachers. it is estimated that india has a shortfall of more than lakh school teachers. the national education policy reminds us that teachers are critical to the goal of nation-building, and achieving a just and prosperous society, rooted in our cultural values and civilizational history. in this context, the new integrated teacher education programme itep is a vital step that we as a nation will be taking towards building a new kind of education system. this will bridge the rich values, traditions, history and civilizational legacy of india with the futuristic potential offered by new technologies for sustainable, inclusive and enriching life on planet earth. the itep program at iit jodhpur is an opportunity for all students who want to be the kind of school teachers who will make a difference in stem education at the secondary stage. an important need of our nation is to equip learners in the age group to years with the necessary modern skills and competencies to participate in a rapidly transforming global knowledge ecosystem, shaped by disruptive technologies including artificial intelligence. our present age requires creative solutions to pressing problems of human rights, sustainable development and global well being. this means thinking out of the box and moving away from traditional models of school education, which reward rote learning and kill the innate creativity of children. my dynamic team of faculty members will work to create the next generation of teachers whose knowledge and pedagogy will free the creative imaginations of their students, leading to novel solutions for viksit bharat and global development. excellence in disciplinary knowledge, cutting edge curricula, intellectual freedom and deep awareness of the local and national needs are the hallmarks of pedagogy at iit jodhpur. i believe that this ethos of the institute will equip school teachers who are passionate about teaching and learning. we want to develop teachers who possess a strong sense of respect to fundamental duties, faith in constitutional values and pride in our indian ethos. this will give them an energy to work passionately and tirelessly to understand and solve problems at the local, national and international levels. we invite you to be part of this journey as we develop a jodhpur model of teacher education that will advance the pursuit of knowledge, wisdom and truth in the nation and the world at large! i have faith that this will be an unforgettable journey for everyone involved in this process. program objectives to ensure that future educators are equipped with the skills, especially in the area of science, technology, and pedagogy, which are required to adapt to evolving educational needs, the objectives of the -year integrated bsc-bed program itep for the secondary stage at iit jodhpur include: developing necessary competencies in graduates for teaching at the secondary stage of school education classes to as envisioned by nep and ncte curriculum framework, p. capacity building in the area of science technology education in india developing pedagogical skills among teachers in india enabling technology integration in the classroom for future learners of india building connection with the society and inculcate the required communication skills expected graduate attributes after completing this programme, the graduate would have: a deep understanding of educational theories and principles, suitable for teaching at the secondary stage of school education classes to as envisioned in nep and ncte curriculum framework, p. training in attributes specific to teaching in grades - and for grades - a comprehensive knowledge of the subject to be taught skillset to integrate technology into teaching to enhance learning experiences an understanding of various forms of assessments to measure student progress a commitment to continuous professional development a commitment to build positive connections with the surrounding society through their teaching practice and model this to their future students by example the itep is being coordinated at iit jodhpur by their center for education technology for education cete and has involvement of faculty members across various disciplines. know more about the cete at iitj.ac.in cete . credit structure the distribution of credits for the programme across years is as follows. source of course criterion course component total credits course category credits per category year year year year sem. sem. sem. sem. sem. sem. sem. sem. ncte curriculum framework an induction programme at the start of each year non graded science major specialization compulsory - - - - specialization elective - - - - - - foundations in education programme compulsory - - open elective - - - - - - - ability enhancement value-added courses programme compulsory - - stage-specific content -cum-pedagogy programme compulsory - - - - school experience programme compulsory - - - - community service non-graded - - - - - - - iitj recommended design and computational thinking programme compulsory - - - - - - - design credit project non-graded - - - - - - - total credits important links cccd iitj recruitment correspondence rti tenders techscape contact old website nccr portal how to reach iitj institute repository donations web policy web information manager feedback cert-in help nirf internal committee intranet links copyright all rights reserved this portal is owned, designed, and developed by digital infrastructure automation , iit jodhpur. n.h. , nagaur road, karwar, jodhpur - , rajasthan india for any comments enquiries feedback, please email the wim . last updated : feb - : am redirecttologinpage !!! arrow downward
program portfolio office of executive education iit jodhpur redirecttologinpage !!! program portfolio the office of executive education at the indian institute of technology iit jodhpur plays a pivotal role in providing advanced, flexible education to working professionals in various high-demand technical fields. with a mission to bridge the gap between industry requirements and professional expertise, the office offers a wide range of programs, including online mtech, postgraduate diplomas pgd , postgraduate certificates pgc , and specialized certification courses. the emphasis is on providing accessible, high-quality education that aligns with the evolving needs of industries such as artificial intelligence ai , data engineering, augmented reality virtual reality ar vr , vlsi, and more. online mtech programs: the online mtech programs are a key component of iit jodhpur's executive education offerings. designed to cater to working professionals, these programs offer the flexibility of online learning while maintaining the rigor of traditional on-campus courses. by focusing on cutting-edge technologies, these programs equip students with skills that are highly valued in today's fast-evolving tech landscape. online mtech in artificial intelligence ai online mtech in data and computational sciences dcs online mtech in remote sensing and mobility rms online mtech in augmented reality virtual reality ar vr online executive mtech in intelligent vlsi systems ivs online mtech in data engineering de postgraduate diploma pgd programs the pgd programs at iit jodhpur are designed for professionals looking to gain specialized knowledge in fields like data engineering, omics technologies, and ai. these programs are shorter than mtech programs but focus intensely on practical applications, making them highly valuable for professionals aiming for specific career advancements. pgd in data engineering pgd de pgd in artificial intelligence ai pgd certificate in next generation omics technologies and applications pgd in data engineering and cloud computing decc postgraduate certificate pgc programs the pgc programs are shorter, more focused courses aimed at professionals looking to enhance specific skills in areas like omics and data analytics. these programs allow professionals to upskill quickly without committing to longer-term academic programs. pgc in data analytics da pgc in artificial intelligence and machine learning ai ml online mba tech program in , the launch of the mba tech program in marks an important diversification of iit jodhpur s offerings, blending technology and management education to create leaders capable of driving innovation in tech industries enrolling students. the executive education programs at iit jodhpur have proven successful in addressing the growing demand for high-tech skills among working professionals. through a combination of mtech, pgd, pgc, and the newly introduced mba tech programs, the office of executive education continues to expand its reach and impact, providing valuable education that aligns with industry requirements. as iit jodhpur continues to grow its executive education portfolio, it will play an increasingly important role in shaping the careers of professionals and advancing the technological capabilities of industries across india and beyond. featured programs s.no. programme name executive mtech in data and computational sciences dcs executive mtech in robotics mobility systems rms executive mtech in augmented reality virtual reality ar vr executive mtech in intelligent vlsi systems ivs executive mtech in data engineering stackable programme transition from post graduate diploma in data engineering pg diploma in data engineering de executive mtech in artificial intelligence stackable programme transition from post graduate diploma in ai pg diploma in artificial intelligence ai mba tech post graduate certificate in ai ml pg diploma and pg certificate i and ii in next - generation omics technologies and applications certificate program i and certificate ii online bsc. program in applied ai and data science view all programs academic calendar academic calendar bs bsc kb academic calendar pg-certificate pg diploma mba-tech trimester model ay - kb academic calendar pg-certificate in machine learning and artificial ay - kb important links cccd iitj recruitment correspondence rti tenders techscape contact old website nccr portal how to reach iitj institute repository donations web policy web information manager feedback cert-in help nirf internal committee intranet links copyright all rights reserved this portal is owned, designed, and developed by digital infrastructure automation , iit jodhpur. n.h. , nagaur road, karwar, jodhpur - , rajasthan india for any comments enquiries feedback, please email the wim . last updated : mar - : pm redirecttologinpage !!! arrow downward
masters of design mdes school of design iit jodhpur redirecttologinpage !!! masters of design mdes overview the mdes programs at the school of design, iit jodhpur combine creativity, technology, and innovation to equip aspiring designers with the skills and industry exposure needed to push the boundaries of design. whether you re passionate about immersive experiences in xr design or pioneering smart products for the future, this program provides the tools and expertise to bring your ideas to life. the school of design, iit jodhpur currently offers two mdes programs: xr design and smart product design. mdes in xr design the mdes xr design is a pathbreaking program in the emerging area of augmented reality ar , mixed reality mr , and virtual reality vr experience design that addresses the growing need of the industry to create useful, engaging, and socially relevant experiences that extend the real world or live entirely in the virtual, in areas such as healthcare, entertainment, and education. mdes in smart product design the world around us is undergoing a dramatic transformation. we are increasingly interconnected, with a growing number of everyday products evolving into intelligent companions. the mdes in smart product design is crafted to meet the growing demand for professionals who can create innovative, user-centric products that harness the power of smart technology. this program is designed to bridge the gap between cutting-edge technologies, user experience ux principles, and design methodology. we aim to delve into the world of smart products, from connected devices to ai-powered systems, learning to design seamless interactions that not only leverage technology's power but also enrich people's lives. this program is ideal for aspiring designers who are passionate about innovation and eager to push the boundaries of physical and digital experiences. as the world embraces smart technology, the demand for skilled designers who can create user-centered, intuitive, and intelligent products is skyrocketing. the mdes in smart product design will prepare future designers to be leaders in this dynamic field, shaping the future of how we interact with the world around us. contact office of the school of design phone: - - between : am and : pm on working days email: important links cccd iitj recruitment correspondence rti tenders techscape contact old website nccr portal how to reach iitj institute repository donations web policy web information manager feedback cert-in help nirf internal committee intranet links copyright all rights reserved this portal is owned, designed, and developed by digital infrastructure automation , iit jodhpur. n.h. , nagaur road, karwar, jodhpur - , rajasthan india for any comments enquiries feedback, please email the wim . last updated : mar - : pm redirecttologinpage !!! arrow downward
summer undergraduate research at jodhpur suraj iit jodhpur redirecttologinpage !!! welcome to the summer undergraduate research at jodhpur suraj , iit jodhpur an opportunity to engage in mentored research with iit jodhpur faculty, explore advanced laboratories, and gain hands-on project, technical, and research experience. iit jodhpur has a provision for direct admission to the meritorious btech students from nits to pursue phd at iit jodhpur. in order to provide a prior exposure of the state-of-the-art research labs of the different academic units at iit jodhpur, the institute has launched a summer internship program summer undergraduate research at jodhpur suraj from summer onwards. the following are the main highlights of of the suraj. opportunity for nit students to join phd program at iit after btech. b.s. msc offline mode for easy access state-of-the-art research facilities poster session and oral presentations and best project certificates stipend of rs. - per month for maximum months suraj offers an opportunity to gain research experience with distinguished faculty from iit jodhpur. applicants are advised to explore the faculty profiles and research areas available on the iit jodhpur website before submitting their preferences for project mentors . applicants can visit the iit jodhpur website to explore the faculty s research areas and prioritise mentors according to their interests. they may contact faculty via email with a well-crafted sop and resume, clearly demonstrating their willingness to learn and potential contribution to the faculty's research. departments offering internship in the iit jodhpur departments bioscience bioengineering chemistry engineering chemical engineering civil and infrastructure engineering computer science engineering electrical engineering mathematics engineering mechanical engineering metallurgical and materials engineering physics schools school of artificial intelligence data science school of design school of liberal arts school of management entrepreneurship research centres center for emerging technologies for sustainable development cetsd center for education technology cet center for aiot and application center for technology foresight and policys ctfp manekshaw centre mcoenssr medical technologies center center for digital health rules that will be followed during the internship at the iit jodhpur the selected interns will be required to adhere to all the rules and code of conduct of iit jodhpur during the internship programme. important links cccd iitj recruitment correspondence rti tenders techscape contact old website nccr portal how to reach iitj institute repository donations web policy web information manager feedback cert-in help nirf internal committee intranet links copyright all rights reserved this portal is owned, designed, and developed by digital infrastructure automation , iit jodhpur. n.h. , nagaur road, karwar, jodhpur - , rajasthan india for any comments enquiries feedback, please email the wim . last updated : mar - : am redirecttologinpage !!! arrow downward
admission to postgraduate programs iit jodhpur redirecttologinpage !!! welcome to admission in post graduate programs doctor of philosophy programs core sciences departments bioscience bioengineering chemistry chemical engineering civil and infrastructure engineering computer science engineering electrical engineering mathematics mechanical materials engineering physics schools school of artificial intelligence data science saide school of design sod school of liberal arts sola school of management entrepreneurship sme centres center for emerging technologies for sustainable development cetsd center for mathematical and computational economics cmce center for internet of things iot applications center for education technology cet rishabh center for research and innovation in clean energy center for technology foresight and policy ctfp idrps idrcs digital humanities quantum information computation robotics mobility systems smart healthcare space science technologies master of technology programs mtech bioscience bioengineering mtech artificial intelligence mtech computer science engineering mtech cyber physical systems mtech communication systems mtech microelectronics and vlsi mtech data and computational sciences mtech advanced manufacturing and design mtech thermofluids engineering mtech drone and anti-drone technologies mtech materials engineering mtech chemical engineering mtech environmental engineering mtech energy infrastructure mtech bridge engineering mtech augmented and virtual reality mtech robotics mtech quantum technologies master of science programs msc chemistry msc mathematics msc physics msc digital humanities msc computational social science ms by research programs m.s. by research next generation ai m.s. by research computational economics m.s. by research intelligent infrastructure m.s. by research precision health integrative medicine master of design m.des. xr design mdes smart product design information related to admission into these programs is posted here, regularly. important links cccd iitj recruitment correspondence rti tenders techscape contact old website nccr portal how to reach iitj institute repository donations web policy web information manager feedback cert-in help nirf internal committee intranet links copyright all rights reserved this portal is owned, designed, and developed by digital infrastructure automation , iit jodhpur. n.h. , nagaur road, karwar, jodhpur - , rajasthan india for any comments enquiries feedback, please email the wim . last updated : mar - : pm redirecttologinpage !!! arrow downward
all announcements indian institute of technology jodhpur iit jodhpur redirecttologinpage !!! all announcements sr. no. title list of selected candidates for phd ay - semester-ii extension of application deadline for empanelment of advocate s law firm s at iit jodhpur list of shortlisted candidates for phd ay - semester-ii december empanelment of advocate s law firm s for iit jodhpur recruitment for the post of registrar information regarding the reporting of the new btech students for ay - , i semester mtech program in bridge engineering apply online for faculty positions advt no.: iitj o e-ii - non-academic staff ay - semester i phd admissions round ii mme advertisement for the post of director, dia-coe, iit jodhpur announcements on old website important links cccd iitj recruitment correspondence rti tenders techscape contact old website nccr portal how to reach iitj institute repository donations web policy web information manager feedback cert-in help nirf internal committee intranet links copyright all rights reserved this portal is owned, designed, and developed by digital infrastructure automation , iit jodhpur. n.h. , nagaur road, karwar, jodhpur - , rajasthan india for any comments enquiries feedback, please email the wim . last updated : mar - : pm redirecttologinpage !!! arrow downward
circulars office of academics affairs iit jodhpur redirecttologinpage !!! circulars note: below mentioned link will open on intranet only circular continuation of assistantship to phd students till thesis defense circular change in thesis submission policy for old phd student s registered before july circular extension of one month for msc and mtech students for project thesis work circular online submission of final thesis after defense for msc and mtech students circular publication requirement for submission of phd thesis circular registration kept alive for mtech, mtech-phd and phd students circular conducting comprehensive examination and sota of the student phd and mtech-phd students registered from july onwards circular rules and regulations for conduct and evaluation of mtech msc project joined on or after july circular comprehensive,sota and qualifier requirements for part time phd and mtech- phd students registered from july onwards circular rules and regulations for conduct and evaluation of mtech msc project joined on or after july circular format and guidelines for submission of project report for mtech mtech-phd msc msc-mtech circular format for submission of research proposal for phd students registered from july onwards circular timeline for evaluation of msc and mtech projects for trimester ay - circular evaluation of msc mtech and msc-mtech projects for trimester ay - circular submission of grades for research proposal in respect of phd students registered from july onwards circular guideline for performance improvement of credits earned by phd students enrolled from july circular academics schedule and plan for teaching and evaluation circular guidelines for design and practical experience credits circular engineering science options for btech students joined post july circular extension for completion of qualifier requirements phd students registered in july circular extension for completion of qualifier requirements phd students registered in december circular branch change criteria for btech in x engineering science post nd year circular amendments in credits requirements, eligibility criteria for opting, minimum credit requirements, credit requirements circular summary of specialization and dual degree leading to mtech mba offered by departments schools idrps circular regulations for joint programmes in medical technologies circular teaching assistantship ta guidelines for ug students circular guideline for btech in engineering science programmes circular annual progress monitoring meeting apm circular -year btech in x engineering science for btech students joined post july circular announcement of state of the art seminar by the departments schools idrp centers circular ipr declaration by co-supervisor external supervisor circular regarding sota research proposal deadline for phd students registered during trimester ii and trimester iii of ay - circular implementation of fine on late registration post pandemic circular guidelines for proposing new courses for the approval of the senate circular guidelines for teaching assistantship allotments circular norms for engagement of guest faculty member s circular degree garde point average dgpa for phd programme continuation for the students enrolled from july onwards circular no. iitj doaa - discontinuation of branch change from academic year in ug programs important links cccd iitj recruitment correspondence rti tenders techscape contact old website nccr portal how to reach iitj institute repository donations web policy web information manager feedback cert-in help nirf internal committee intranet links copyright all rights reserved this portal is owned, designed, and developed by digital infrastructure automation , iit jodhpur. n.h. , nagaur road, karwar, jodhpur - , rajasthan india for any comments enquiries feedback, please email the wim . last updated : mar - : am redirecttologinpage !!! arrow downward
curriculum office of academics affairs iit jodhpur redirecttologinpage !!! curriculum curriculum for programs before curriculum for programs from . bachelor of technology programs . btech bioengineering link will open on intranet only . btech computer science engineering link will open on intranet only . btech electrical engineering link will open on intranet only . btech mechanical engineering link will open on intranet only . btech ai and data science link will open on intranet only . btech chemical engineering link will open on intranet only . btech materials engineering link will open on intranet only . btech civil and infrastructure engineering link will open on intranet only other course contents . ug first year link will open on intranet only . list of institute wide common courses and course contents from nd year onwards link will open on intranet only . transition plan for btech , and batches link will open on intranet only old transition plan link will open on intranet only . minor department interdisciplinary specialization for batches undergoing transition plan link will open on intranet only . non graded institute level courses link will open on intranet only . courses offered by hss link will open on intranet only . courses identified as programme electives but offered by the other departments link will open on intranet only curriculum for pg programs . master of science programs . msc chemistry link will open on intranet only . msc mathematics link will open on intranet only . msc physics link will open on intranet only . msc digital humanities link will open on intranet only . master of science - master of technology programs . mathematics data science link will open on intranet only . master of technology programs . mtech bioscience bioengineering link will open on intranet only . mtech computer science engineering - updated course content for mtech computer science and engineering and artificial intelligence link will open on intranet only . mtech artificial intelligence - updated course content for mtech computer science and engineering and artificial intelligence link will open on intranet only . mtech cyber physical systems link will open on intranet only . mtech sensors and internet of things link will open on intranet only . mtech data and computational sciences link will open on intranet only . mtech advanced manufacturing link will open on intranet only . mtech thermofluids engineering link will open on intranet only . mtech materials engineering link will open on intranet only . mtech chemical engineering link will open on intranet only . mtech infrastructure engineering with specialization in environmental engineering link will open on intranet only . mtech infrastructure engineering with specialization in energy link will open on intranet only . mtech augmented reality and virtual reality link will open on intranet only . mtech intelligent communication systems link will open on intranet only . mtech - robotics and mobility systems link will open on intranet only . master of technology - doctor of philosophy mtech-phd dual degree programs . mtech-phd dual degree bioscience bioengineering link will open on intranet only . mtech-phd dual degree computer science engineering link will open on intranet only . mtech-phd dual degree artificial intelligence link will open on intranet only . mtech-phd dual degree communication and signal processing link will open on intranet only . mtech-phd dual degree cyber physical systems link will open on intranet only . mtech-phd dual degree sensors and internet of things link will open on intranet only . mtech-phd dual degree data and computational sciences link will open on intranet only . mtech-phd dual degree metallurgical materials engineering link will open on intranet only . mtech-phd dual degree design engineering link will open on intranet only . mtech-phd dual degree advanced manufacturing link will open on intranet only . mtech-phd dual degree thermofluids engineering link will open on intranet only . mtech-phd dual degree chemical engineering link will open on intranet only . mtech-phd dual degree infrastructure engineering with specialization in environmental engineering link will open on intranet only . mtech-phd dual degree infrastructure engineering with specialization in energy link will open on intranet only . mtech-phd dual degree intelligent communication systems link will open on intranet only . doctor of philosophy programs core sciences . phd chemistry link will open on intranet only . phd mathematics link will open on intranet only . phd physics link will open on intranet only engineering sciences . phd biosciences and bioengineering link will open on intranet only . phd computer science engineering . phd electrical engineering link will open on intranet only . phd mechanical engineering link will open on intranet only . phd metallurgical materials engineering inter-disciplinary areas . phd robotics and mobility systems . phd science of intelligence . phd digital humanities link will open on intranet only . phd iot applications . phd quantum information and computation link will open on intranet only . phd smart healthcare link will open on intranet only . phd space technologies humanities social sciences phd humanities social sciences link will open on intranet only important links cccd iitj recruitment correspondence rti tenders techscape contact old website nccr portal how to reach iitj institute repository donations web policy web information manager feedback cert-in help nirf internal committee intranet links copyright all rights reserved this portal is owned, designed, and developed by digital infrastructure automation , iit jodhpur. n.h. , nagaur road, karwar, jodhpur - , rajasthan india for any comments enquiries feedback, please email the wim . last updated : mar - : am redirecttologinpage !!! arrow downward
all research highlights indian institute of technology jodhpur iit jodhpur redirecttologinpage !!! all research highlights sr. no. description dr. suraj srivastava, assistant professor in the department of electrical engineering, became a fellow of the institution of electronics telecommunication engineers iete - fiete imaging atomic-scale magnetism with energy-filtered differential phase contrast method structure and exfoliation mechanism of two-dimensional boron nanosheets d materials for potable water application: basic nanoarchitectonics and recent progresses research paper published by dr. sushmita jha in scientific reports language independent speech generation system a novel multipath mitigation technique for gnss signals in urban scenarios rajasthani clay catalytic converters for automobiles optical field design for solar thermal applications archive important links cccd iitj recruitment correspondence rti tenders techscape contact old website nccr portal how to reach iitj institute repository donations web policy web information manager feedback cert-in help nirf internal committee intranet links copyright all rights reserved this portal is owned, designed, and developed by digital infrastructure automation , iit jodhpur. n.h. , nagaur road, karwar, jodhpur - , rajasthan india for any comments enquiries feedback, please email the wim . arrow downward
all research highlights indian institute of technology jodhpur iit jodhpur redirecttologinpage !!! all research highlights dr. suraj srivastava, assistant professor in the department of electrical engineering, became a fellow of the institution of electronics telecommunication engineers iete - fiete dr. suraj srivastava, assistant professor in the department of electrical engineering, became a fellow of the institution of electronics telecommunication engineers iete - fiete important links cccd iitj recruitment correspondence rti tenders techscape contact old website nccr portal how to reach iitj institute repository donations web policy web information manager feedback cert-in help nirf internal committee intranet links copyright all rights reserved this portal is owned, designed, and developed by digital infrastructure automation , iit jodhpur. n.h. , nagaur road, karwar, jodhpur - , rajasthan india for any comments enquiries feedback, please email the wim . last updated : mar - : pm redirecttologinpage !!! arrow downward
all research highlights indian institute of technology jodhpur iit jodhpur redirecttologinpage !!! all research highlights imaging atomic-scale magnetism with energy-filtered differential phase contrast method tittle of the paper: imaging atomic-scale magnetism with energy-filtered differential phase contrast method physical review b , dr. devendra singh negi department of metallurgical and materials engineering, iit jodhpur description: the functional nano magnetic materials are indispensable for advanced electronic applications. as the nanotechnology is rapidly advancing, the size of these functional materials is also shrinking in the same proportion. therefore, to further develop and engineers the nano magnetic materials we require a technique which can probe or image the magnetism at atomic scale sensitivity. the transmission electron microscopy tem is one of the important instruments, which can image and quantify the magnetism at atomic scale. recently developed electron magnetic circular dichroism emcd and differential phase contrast dpc methods in tem has enabled to access the electromagnetic information of single atom. the dpc method in tem probes the elastic deflection of the incident convergent electron probe with the electromagnetic filed of the atom. the quantum of deflection is in proportion with the charge density or electromagnetic field of the atoms. therefore, dpc allows to image the charge density, electromagnetism field at atomic scale. this method also enhances the imaging contrast and allow to image the light atoms very efficiently. in this work we have developed a new method in tem to image the magnetism at atomic scale with energy filtered electron in dpc.the energy filtered electron in tem are the core-loss electron, which excite the core electron of an atom to unoccupied energy levels. these electron carries the information of the magnetism of the atoms. our develop method shows that, the sensitivity of the inelastic electron is two orders of magnitude then the conventional elastic counterpart. interestingly, the energy-filtered dpc can probe the magnetism along the probe direction. therefore, this novel approach offers a pathway to image the in-plane and out-of-plane magnetism simultaneously at atomic scale. our work introduces a new paradigm to image the -dimensional magnetism at atomic scale sensitivity in tem. figure . schematic diagram showing the ef-dpc method in tem. a converged electron probe excites the core-electron of atom to higher energy level. these inelastic electron carries the magnetism information of the atom, which subsequently forms the diffraction pattern. these diffraction patterns are detected by the dpc detector to image the magnetic field of the atom. figure . ef-dpc of two mn atom in lamnaso unit cell, showing the directional component of magnetism, referred as sx, sy, sz and corresponding electron deflection in mili-radian unit. the out-of-plane magnetic field and magnetic signal shows the vortex at the centre of the mn atoms. article by: dr. devendra singh negi link : research domain: transmission electron microscopy, magnetism important links cccd iitj recruitment correspondence rti tenders techscape contact old website nccr portal how to reach iitj institute repository donations web policy web information manager feedback cert-in help nirf internal committee intranet links copyright all rights reserved this portal is owned, designed, and developed by digital infrastructure automation , iit jodhpur. n.h. , nagaur road, karwar, jodhpur - , rajasthan india for any comments enquiries feedback, please email the wim . last updated : mar - : pm redirecttologinpage !!! arrow downward
all research highlights indian institute of technology jodhpur iit jodhpur redirecttologinpage !!! all research highlights structure and exfoliation mechanism of two-dimensional boron nanosheets tittle of the paper: structure and exfoliation mechanism of two-dimensional boron nanosheets nature communications : , dr. pranay ranjan department of metallurgical and materials engineering, iit jodhpur description: exfoliation of two-dimensional d nanosheets from three-dimensional d non-layered, non-van der waals crystals represents an emerging strategy for materials engineering that could significantly increase the library of d materials. yet, the exfoliation mechanism in which nanosheets are derived from crystals that are not intrinsically layered remains unclear. here, we show that planar defects in the starting d boron material promote the exfoliation of d boron sheets by combining liquid-phase exfoliation, aberration-corrected scanning transmission electron microscopy, raman spectroscopy, and density functional theory calculations. we demonstrate that d boron nanosheets consist of a planar arrangement of icosahedral sub-units cleaved along the planes of -rhombohedral boron. correspondingly, intrinsic stacking faults in d boron form parallel layers of faulted planes in the same orientation as the exfoliated nanosheets, reducing the cleavage energy. planar defects represent a potential engineerable pathway for exfoliating d sheets from d boron and, more broadly, the other covalently bonded materials. figure : liquid phase exfoliation of boron. a schematic depiction of products through liquid-phase exfoliation from van der waals vdw crystals, isotropic polycrystalline materials, and boron. b scanning electron microscopy sem images of the starting boron material: sample a sigma-aldrich , sample b alfa-aesar , and sample c yamanaka advanced materials . c converged beam transmission electron microscopy tem image, and corresponding high-angle annular darkfield haadf scanning transmission electron microscopy stem image of d boron sheets suspended on a holey carbon tem grid. figure : role of planar defects in the exfoliation mechanism of boron. a tem bf image of d boron sample c with a high density of planar defects in the bottom right crystal grain . b c-bf stem image of -rhombohedral boron projected along the zone-axis showing a sequence of parallel planar defects, including twins and stacking faults dashed lines indicate the defect plane . the icosahedral columns are represented as red-ringed circles for easier visualization of the symmetry breaking due to the defects. the magnified images of the twin boundary and stacking fault sf , boxed in light blue and red, respectively, are shown on the right with the faulted plane marked by the black arrows. c model of the unit cell projected in the depicting the atoms red circles forming the defect planes. d density functional theory dft calculated energies for the formation of the -i and -ii surfaces from the pristine crystal and from the planar defects. e schematic of the defect-mediated exfoliation process viewed from the orientation . the icosahedral columns are represented as red-ringed circles, stacking faults as dashed lines, and symmetry breaking of the crystal as solid lines. the black arrows represent the cleaving of the crystal from the stacking faults article by: dr. pranay ranjan link : research domain: d materials, borophene important links cccd iitj recruitment correspondence rti tenders techscape contact old website nccr portal how to reach iitj institute repository donations web policy web information manager feedback cert-in help nirf internal committee intranet links copyright all rights reserved this portal is owned, designed, and developed by digital infrastructure automation , iit jodhpur. n.h. , nagaur road, karwar, jodhpur - , rajasthan india for any comments enquiries feedback, please email the wim . last updated : mar - : pm redirecttologinpage !!! arrow downward
all research highlights indian institute of technology jodhpur iit jodhpur redirecttologinpage !!! all research highlights d materials for potable water application: basic nanoarchitectonics and recent progresses tittle of the paper: d materials for potable water application: basic nanoarchitectonics and recent progresses small , dr. pranay ranjan department of metallurgical and materials engineering, iit jodhpur description: water polluted by toxic chemicals due to waste from chemical pharmaceuticals and harmful microbes such as e. coli bacteria causes several fatal diseases; and therefore, water ltration is crucial for accessing clean and safe water necessary for good health. conventional water ltration technologies include activated carbon lters, reverse osmosis, and ultra ltration. however, they face several challenges, including high energy consumption, fouling, limited selectivity, ine ciencies in removing certain contaminants, dimensional control of pores, and structural chemical changes at higher thermal conditions and upon prolonged usage of water lter. recently, the advent of d materials such as graphene, bn, mos , mxenes, and so on opens new avenues for advanced water ltration systems. this review delves into the nano-architectonics of d materials for water ltration applications. the current state of water ltration technologies is explored, the inherent challenges they face are outlines, and the unique properties and advantages of d materials are highlighted. furthermore, the scope of this review is discussed, which encompasses the synthesis, characterization, and application of various d materials in water ltration, providing insights into future research directions and potential industrial applications figure : existing membrane technology concerning the structure of membranes figure : water puri cation techniques. article by: dr. pranay ranjan link : research domain: d materials, membrane, water filtration important links cccd iitj recruitment correspondence rti tenders techscape contact old website nccr portal how to reach iitj institute repository donations web policy web information manager feedback cert-in help nirf internal committee intranet links copyright all rights reserved this portal is owned, designed, and developed by digital infrastructure automation , iit jodhpur. n.h. , nagaur road, karwar, jodhpur - , rajasthan india for any comments enquiries feedback, please email the wim . last updated : mar - : pm redirecttologinpage !!! arrow downward
all research highlights indian institute of technology jodhpur iit jodhpur redirecttologinpage !!! all research highlights research paper published by dr. sushmita jha in scientific reports identification of markers for deadly brain tumor a multi institute team, led by dr. sushmita jha, department of bioscience and bioengineering, iit jodhpur has identified new markers for a deadly brain tumour glioblastoma. in the paper published in the international journal scientific reports nature publishing group , dr jha s team used a multipronged approach utilizing data from the cancer genome atlas, experimental data generated from normal cells and brain tumour cells cultured in the laboratory and experimental data generated from human brain tissue to identify novel biomarkers for glioma. team members include dr sushmita paul assistant professor, dept. of bioscience and bioengineering, iitj , dr epari sridhar department of pathology, tata memorial hospital, mumbai, maharashtra, india , phd students dr nidhi sharma, ms shalini singh, ms shivanjali saxena, mr ishan agrawal , and mtech students ms varsha srinivasan, ms swetha, mr arvind . this study was funded by the department of science and technology dst and department of biotechnology dbt government of india. this is the first report identifying nlrp as a candidate prognostic marker for glioma progression leading the way for designing future therapeutic strategies background gliomas are the most prevalent intracranial tumours accounting for of primary malignant brain tumors. based on the degree of malignancy, gliomas are classified into low and high grade. low grade glioma lgg specifically represents of all central nervous system tumors in children. high-grade gliomas glioblastomas account for . of cns tumors in india. even after surgery, chemotherapy and radiotherapy the median survival is less than months. gliomas are tumors arising from glial cells. glial cells constitute approximately of the human brain. they are responsible for maintenance, immunity and repair. the recalcitrance of glioblastomas gbm results from their ability to form new blood vessels via angiogenesis and tumor heterogeneity. the highly infiltrative behavior of gbm makes surgery nearly ineffective, since tumor cells and glioblastoma stem cells colonize the surrounding brain tissue causing relapses even at distant brain sites. the nucleotide-binding domain, and leucine-rich repeat containing receptors nlrs and absent-in-melanoma aim are innate immune receptors crucial for initiation and progression of several cancers. there is a dearth of reports linking nlrs and aim to glioma pathology. we used a data-driven approach to identify nlrs, aim and nlr-associated gene expression and methylation patterns in low grade glioma and glioblastoma, using the cancer genome atlas tcga patient datasets. since tcga data is obtained from tumor tissue, comprising of multiple cell populations including glioma cells, endothelial cells and tumor-associated microglia macrophages we carried out cell culture experiments and immunohistochemistry on human brain tissue to identify cell specific effects. tcga data mining showed significant differential nlr regulation and strong correlation with survival in different grades of glioma. we report differential expression and methylation of nlrs in glioma, followed by nlrp identification as a candidate prognostic marker for glioma progression. in the normal brain cells known as microglia function as immune cells. we found that nlrp deficient microglia show increased colony formation while nlrp deficient glioma cells show decreased cellular proliferation. immunohistochemistry of human glioma tissue shows increased nlrp expression. interestingly, microglia show reduced migration towards nlrp deficient glioma cells. the most significant part of the work is identification of the protein nlrp that is involved in the normal immune response when absent in microglia leads to aberrant cellular proliferation. moreover, this protein is shown to be highly expressed in tumour cells. future studies from our group are aimed at understanding the molecular signaling pathways. this may allow for development of targeted therapeutics and increased survival. important links cccd iitj recruitment correspondence rti tenders techscape contact old website nccr portal how to reach iitj institute repository donations web policy web information manager feedback cert-in help nirf internal committee intranet links copyright all rights reserved this portal is owned, designed, and developed by digital infrastructure automation , iit jodhpur. n.h. , nagaur road, karwar, jodhpur - , rajasthan india for any comments enquiries feedback, please email the wim . last updated : mar - : pm redirecttologinpage !!! arrow downward
all research highlights indian institute of technology jodhpur iit jodhpur redirecttologinpage !!! all research highlights language independent speech generation system various preordain situations result in a disease or injury to people and deprive them off with their natural ability to communicate verbally. the diseases which affect the voice and language of people may include congenital impairments, such as cerebral palsy, intellectual impairment and autism, and acquired conditions, such as amyotrophic lateral sclerosis and parkinson s disease. as larynx is the main organ for voice production, any illness which results in the removal of larynx, i.e, laryngectomy, will result in loss of voice. the illness may be malignancy of larynx or pharynx or severe laryngeal stenosis. the afflicted people find other means like alaryngeal methods, which include hand written notes, by simple actions like hand or facial gestures , with esophageal speech or with aid of devices like electrolarynx or tracheo esophageal prosthesis. the means of sign language require the use of hand- gestures and or facial expressions. sign language is a mode of communication for patients who are affected since birth. in recent years, the technological advancement in the field of electro-medical devices for life support, implantable biomedical devices, and wearable medical devices have successfully provided artificial abilities to the afflicted people related to any kind of disability or impairment. the electro-medical devices, implantable biomedical devices, and wearable medical devices may include but are not limited to an artificial pacemaker, ventricular assist device, bioartificial liver, wearable dialysis device, implantable artificial kidney devices, artificial limbs, and sensory devices, such as hearing aids, optical lenses etc. the electro-medical devices when used in combination with multiple speech synthesis techniques provide an option for the people with speech and language impairment, to communicate audibly. such electro-medical devices are known as augmentative and alternative communication aac devices or speech generation devices sgds . in the speech synthesis techniques, the spoken language is generated by a machine on the basis of a written input. the present subject matter describes methods and systems for automatically generating speech which will be language independent and facilitate the communication between mute people and normal people. in an example implementation of the present subject matter, electrical signals are generated by a first set of sensors, wearable on a combination of a thumb, finger s , and or a wrist of a first hand of a user to produce an electrical signal depending on bending of at least one of the thumb, the finger s , and or the wrist of the first hand. the electrical signals are also generated by a second set of sensors, wearable on a combination of a thumb, finger s , and or a wrist of a second hand of a user to produce an electrical signal depending on bending of at least one of the thumb, the finger s , and or the wrist of the second hand. the magnitude of the received electrical signals is compared with a plurality of pre-defined combination of magnitudes stored in a memory by using the signal processing unit. a pre-defined combination of magnitude of the plurality of pre-defined combination of magnitudes is associated to a phonetic corresponding to at least one of a consonant and a vowel. in an example implementation, the consonant and the vowel can be from hindi language phonetics. a phonetic is assigned to the received electrical signals based on the comparison. an audio signal is generated by an audio transmitter corresponding to the assigned phonetic and based on trained data associated with vocal characteristics stored in a machine learning unit. the generation of the audio signals according to the phonetics having combination of vowels and consonants leads to the generation of speech and enables the mute people to audibly communicate with normal people. the speech synthesis technique of the present subject matter uses phonetics, and therefore the speech generation is independent of any language. reference: india patent application: publication date: author of the article: dr. sumit kalra, dr. arpit khandelwal in collaboration with: aiims jodhpur important links cccd iitj recruitment correspondence rti tenders techscape contact old website nccr portal how to reach iitj institute repository donations web policy web information manager feedback cert-in help nirf internal committee intranet links copyright all rights reserved this portal is owned, designed, and developed by digital infrastructure automation , iit jodhpur. n.h. , nagaur road, karwar, jodhpur - , rajasthan india for any comments enquiries feedback, please email the wim . last updated : mar - : pm redirecttologinpage !!! arrow downward
all research highlights indian institute of technology jodhpur iit jodhpur redirecttologinpage !!! all research highlights a novel multipath mitigation technique for gnss signals in urban scenarios global navigation satellite system gnss based positioning technologies are poised to play a crucial role in providing location based services that are used for strategic purposes, emergency safety-of-life services and for commercial purposes. in urban and suburban settings, presence of multiple reflectors and scatterers like high-rise buildings, towers, vehicles, trees cause the transmitted signal to reach gnss receiver through multiple paths. gnss receiver while tracking the navigation signal can potentially get locked to any of the signal replicas coming from the transmitter, leading to a range error in the navigation solution. therefore, multipath propagation poses a serious threat to the accuracy of position solutions determined by gnss receivers. in a recent study, professor arun kumar singh and his group from the indian institute of technology iit jodhpur has proposed a novel multipath mitigation technique that provides significant improvements in range accuracies over the current state of the art techniques like narrow correlator nc and high resolution correlator hrc or double delta correlator. the performance improvements are valid for general multipath models encountered in the land-mobile-satellite channels. the performance guarantees include closed form expressions for the probability of correct delay estimate and simulation results for the average range error variation with respect to carrier to noise ratio cnr , signal bandwidth and different channel settings. the range error caused due to multipath propagation can be dealt with in two possible ways- multipath estimation or multipath mitigation. in general, multipath estimation techniques involve optimization of the conditional probability function over a range of multipath delays, amplitudes and phases; their computational complexity is very high and they are not suitable for implementation on smart devices that operate with limited power. the current state-of-the-art multipath mitigation techniques include nc and hrc. nc and hrc perform reasonably well in the scenarios where the number of multipaths is small and line of sight los component has highest amplitude amongst all multipaths. in most pertinent urban scenarios there can be large number of multipath and los may not always have the highest power among all the paths. therefore, novel multipath mitigation solutions were needed to overcome limitations of current state-of-the-art techniques. the present study, to be published in ieee transactions on vehicular technology, provides a novel multipath mitigation technique that is able to estimate ranges with a very high probability even in the presence of multipaths. the proposed technique provides improved accuracy as compared to the currently known best multipath mitigation techniques. the performance guarantees hold for the cnr of as low as db, for the typical vehicle speeds kmph as well as for high speeds kmph , and for different multipath scenarios including urban, sub-urban, metropolitan environments. in the proposed technique a double differentiated correlation function based histogram output is used to estimate the range. the statistical independence of channel parameters which change after every coherence time is exploited in order to improve the probability of correct estimate. the results are validated using both statistical models from ieee . b and measurement based land mobile satellite channel models developed through field trials by dlr germany and also standardized by international telecom union itu . the new technique will be pave way for use of gnss receivers in urban scenarios for future generation smart vehicles and high accuracy based location services. important links cccd iitj recruitment correspondence rti tenders techscape contact old website nccr portal how to reach iitj institute repository donations web policy web information manager feedback cert-in help nirf internal committee intranet links copyright all rights reserved this portal is owned, designed, and developed by digital infrastructure automation , iit jodhpur. n.h. , nagaur road, karwar, jodhpur - , rajasthan india for any comments enquiries feedback, please email the wim . last updated : mar - : pm redirecttologinpage !!! arrow downward
all research highlights indian institute of technology jodhpur iit jodhpur redirecttologinpage !!! all research highlights rajasthani clay catalytic converters for automobiles the current discovery, indicate new non-rare earth, non-noble metal based catalytic convertor using rajasthani clay. the catalytic convertor is developed by cleaver use iron-nickel-cobalt nanoparticles in rajasthani clay. the metal oxides work as oxygen reservoir and could completely oxidize nox, cox, and hydrocarbons at lower than oc temperature. background automobile industries are facing more and stricter emissions regulations in an effort to reduce the amount of harmful air pollutants that are released into the environment related to nox, cox, and soot along with particulate matter. currently, one method of reducing harmful emissions is three-way catalytic twc converter that reduces harmful nox to n and o , oxidizes co to co , and oxidizes residual hydrocarbons to co and water. however, it requires the use of the rare-earth element cerium ce and palladium, which are increasing in price and suffering from supply problems lately. these expensive metals make the the catalyst convertor one of the costliest part of car with price from - . each catalytic convertor have about - gm of pure palladium, which cost around per gram more expensive than gold. despite that cost, the performance of catalytic convertors go down with time mostly in - years, while approved life of car is about years. the research team of prof. sharma has been working on find an alternate solution by understanding the catalytic convertor deactivation and looking for a cheaper solution for the same. his team has found that with time, palladium particle spread over ceria undergo surface oxidation and decompose in small particle due to high temperature oxidation process degree . so there were three challenges, reduction of temperature, replacement of palladium and cerium with non-nobel metal, and re-design the convertor to prevent metal deactivation. the fe-ni-co cooperative nano-particles were used in the isolated nanospheres work as single site catalyst where hafniarajasthani clay used as oxygen reservoir. the catalytic performance was found to be better than conventional convertor at degree. article written by: rakesh k sharma image credits: rakesh k sharma, smcrg lab link to published work patent : a hydrogen-annealed bimetallic oxide and implementations thereof application date -august- research domain: environmental science important links cccd iitj recruitment correspondence rti tenders techscape contact old website nccr portal how to reach iitj institute repository donations web policy web information manager feedback cert-in help nirf internal committee intranet links copyright all rights reserved this portal is owned, designed, and developed by digital infrastructure automation , iit jodhpur. n.h. , nagaur road, karwar, jodhpur - , rajasthan india for any comments enquiries feedback, please email the wim . last updated : mar - : pm redirecttologinpage !!! arrow downward
all research highlights indian institute of technology jodhpur iit jodhpur redirecttologinpage !!! all research highlights optical field design for solar thermal applications the present investigation focusses on optical layout for the design of a medium to large scale kw- mw solar field based on concentrated solar power csp technology using heliostats with central receiver system crs . the implementation of such solar field can be carried out where direct normal incidence dni is moderate to high, thus reducing the dependence on fossil fuel. background among the various renewable energies, solar thermal energy ste has attracted attention of researcher due to its direct applicability in various industries. in particular, concentrated solar power csp is widely implemented for this purpose as high temperature is reached due to high optical concentration, which in turn leads to higher efficiencies and thus making it as a preferred system. in this direction, heliostat field with a central tower provide an ideal candidate and thus designing a heliostat field layout is an essential component of it. heliostat field comprises of large size mirrors that reflects the incident solar radiation onto a receiver as the sun moves during the day as well as throughout the year. the challenging task is estimating the number of heliostats required to produce the desired thermal output. the parameters that affects heliostat field depend on geographical location latitude and longitude , shadow associated with a given heliostat dimension, cosine losses, spacing between the two adjacent heliostats, blocking article written by: v. narayanan image credits: sanjoy chatterjee and pedamallu vvnsp raju link to the present work: erjee - paper.pdf research domain: lasers and optics important links cccd iitj recruitment correspondence rti tenders techscape contact old website nccr portal how to reach iitj institute repository donations web policy web information manager feedback cert-in help nirf internal committee intranet links copyright all rights reserved this portal is owned, designed, and developed by digital infrastructure automation , iit jodhpur. n.h. , nagaur road, karwar, jodhpur - , rajasthan india for any comments enquiries feedback, please email the wim . last updated : mar - : pm redirecttologinpage !!! arrow downward
all research highlights indian institute of technology jodhpur iit jodhpur redirecttologinpage !!! all research highlights archive sr. no. description model development to predict shrinkage defects during solidification of pure metal important links cccd iitj recruitment correspondence rti tenders techscape contact old website nccr portal how to reach iitj institute repository donations web policy web information manager feedback cert-in help nirf internal committee intranet links copyright all rights reserved this portal is owned, designed, and developed by digital infrastructure automation , iit jodhpur. n.h. , nagaur road, karwar, jodhpur - , rajasthan india for any comments enquiries feedback, please email the wim . arrow downward
research areas indian institute of technology jodhpur iit jodhpur redirecttologinpage !!! research areas the major research groups in the department are focused along the following disciplinary interdisciplinary tracks: literature, linguistics and cultural studies philosophy psychology sociology economics the following table lists the members of the faculty and their specific research areas. . literature, linguistics and cultural studies faculty area of interest dr. vidya sarveswaran associate professor ecocriticism, environmental humanities, blue humanities, literatures of the anthropocene, and documentary filmmaking dr. anupama mohan associate professor indian ocean studies; working class literature; transmodernity and literature; environmental humanities; history of ideas dr. parichay patra associate professor film studies: transnational cinema, indian new wave, the global , film aesthetics dr. natasa thoudam associate professor literary studies, gender studies, religious studies, comic studies, performance studies, digital humanities and their intersections focused on india's northeast manipur dr. gurujegan murugesan associate professor theoretical formal linguistics, syntax. dr. tonisha guin associate professor knowledge systems in global south, decoloniality, identity studies, space studies, new media issues dr. sreedevi d associate professor sensory studies; literary and critical theory; senses and writing; touch and aesthetics dr. kanak yadav faculty associate literature and cities, dalit literature, indian english writing and the postcolonial anglophone novel . philosophy prof. chhanda chakraborti visiting professor bioethics, public health ethics, csr and business ethics; philosophy of mind, philosophy of logic dr. k. j. george associate professor philosophy: applied ethics, ethics of technology, bioethics dr. v. hari narayan associate professor philosophy: cognitive studies, evolutionary theory, analytic philosophy and mindfulness . psychology dr. ankita sharma associate professor psychology: gerontology, clinical and positive psychology dr. suman dhaka associate professor cognitive neuroscience, cognitive psychology; sleep and cognition . sociology dr. farhat naz associate professor natural resource management; water governance; climate change, disaster risk reduction, gender dr. prasenjeet tribhuvan associate professor anthropology of material objects, sts studies in sociology, political ecology, tourism and youth subcultures dr. rachel philip associate professor sociology of education; education policy; childhood studies; social stratification; science, technology, society studies . economics dr. alok ranjan associate professor public health, universal health coverage, health system dr. ruhi sonal associate professor decision theory, social networks, bounded rationality. dr. akanksha choudhary associate professor development economics, education and health economics, unfair inequalities, public policy and gender studies dr. gopakumar k u associate professor structural macroeconomic modelling, developmental studies, applied econometrics important links cccd iitj recruitment correspondence rti tenders techscape contact old website nccr portal how to reach iitj institute repository donations web policy web information manager feedback cert-in help nirf internal committee intranet links copyright all rights reserved this portal is owned, designed, and developed by digital infrastructure automation , iit jodhpur. n.h. , nagaur road, karwar, jodhpur - , rajasthan india for any comments enquiries feedback, please email the wim . last updated : mar - : pm redirecttologinpage !!! arrow downward
important links indian institute of technology jodhpur iit jodhpur redirecttologinpage !!! important links s. r. ranganathan learning hub erp portal external applications xapp inclusivity cell international relations companies oversight corporate relation transport: bus schedule techscape publications iitj house allotment rules for employees correspondence grievance redressal committee how to reach iit jodhpur recruitment rti joint consultative committee post doctoral fellows commemorative days iit jodhpur vigilance policy scholarsphere sc and st helpdesk tenders chronological development friends of iit jodhpur anti sexual harassment policy contact important links cccd iitj recruitment correspondence rti tenders techscape contact old website nccr portal how to reach iitj institute repository donations web policy web information manager feedback cert-in help nirf internal committee intranet links copyright all rights reserved this portal is owned, designed, and developed by digital infrastructure automation , iit jodhpur. n.h. , nagaur road, karwar, jodhpur - , rajasthan india for any comments enquiries feedback, please email the wim . last updated : mar - : pm redirecttologinpage !!! arrow downward
faculty members indian institute of technology jodhpur iit jodhpur redirecttologinpage !!! faculty members the institute has appointed faculty members with background in different disciplines. they are organised through the following academic departments, schools, idrps, and centers: departments bioscience bioengineering chemistry engineering chemical engineering civil and infrastructure engineering computer science engineering electrical engineering mathematics engineering mechanical engineering metallurgical and materials engineering physics engineering schools school of artificial intelligence data science saide school of design sod school of liberal arts sola school of management entrepreneurship sme centres center for education technology for education cete center for technology foresight and policys ctfp center for emerging technologies for sustainable development cetsd idrps idrcs centre for aiot and application space technology digital humanities robotics mobility systems quantum information and computation iitj-aiimsj medical technologies center centre for digital health important links cccd iitj recruitment correspondence rti tenders techscape contact old website nccr portal how to reach iitj institute repository donations web policy web information manager feedback cert-in help nirf internal committee intranet links copyright all rights reserved this portal is owned, designed, and developed by digital infrastructure automation , iit jodhpur. n.h. , nagaur road, karwar, jodhpur - , rajasthan india for any comments enquiries feedback, please email the wim . last updated : mar - : pm redirecttologinpage !!! arrow downward
indian institute of technology jodhpur iit jodhpur redirecttologinpage !!! about iit jodhpur indian institute of technology jodhpur was established in , to foster technology education and research in india. the institute is committed to technological thought and action to benefit the economic development of india. scholarship in teaching and learning; scholarship in research and creative accomplishments; and relevance to industry are three driving forces for us at iit jodhpur. iit jodhpur functions from its sprawling residential permanent campus of acres on national highway , north-northwest of jodhpur towards nagaur. this campus is meticulously planned and envisioned to stand as a symbol of academics simple, but deep. discover more about iitj highlight view all highlights imaging atomic-scale magnetism with energy-filtered differential phase contrast method structure and exfoliation mechanism of two-dimensional boron nanosheets d materials for potable water application: basic nano architectonics and recent progresses mba admission - : cat cut-off for the personal interview mba admissions date extended! extension notice for the post of registrar, advt. no: . kb advertisement for the post of registrar on tenure deputation , iit jodhpur extension of application deadline for empanelment of advocate s law firm s at iit jodhpur kb latest news view all news dr. saakshi dhanekar, associate professor in department of electrical engineering, iit jodhpur published a manuscript in the chemical engineering journal impact factor congratulations to dr sandip murarka for receiving the crsi bronze medal congratulations to dr sandip murarka on his appointment as an associate editor of rsc advances, a prestigious journal published by the royal society of chemistry rsc announcement view all announcements extension of application deadline for empanelment of advocate s law firm s at iit jodhpur list of selected candidates for phd ay - semester-ii list of shortlisted candidates for phd ay - semester-ii december event view all events mar national safety week, - march feb hands-on workshop on recent trends in generative ai models and their applications mar skill development program on matlab simulink and software-defined radio sdr -based... key functionaries shri a. s. kiran kumar chairman, bog prof. avinash kumar agarwal director student life at iit jodhpur student life at iit jodhpur is vibrant and enriching, offering a perfect blend of academic learning and extracurricular activities. with a focus on holistic development, the institute provides numerous opportunities for students to explore their interests and talents beyond the classroom. the institute also emphasizes the importance of community service and social responsibility, encouraging students to engage in various outreach programs and initiatives that benefit society. discover more about student life at iitj important links cccd iitj recruitment correspondence rti tenders techscape contact old website nccr portal how to reach iitj institute repository donations web policy web information manager feedback cert-in help nirf internal committee intranet links copyright all rights reserved this portal is owned, designed, and developed by digital infrastructure automation , iit jodhpur. n.h. , nagaur road, karwar, jodhpur - , rajasthan india for any comments enquiries feedback, please email the wim . last updated : mar - : pm redirecttologinpage !!! arrow downward
academic programmes rules regulations for students enrolled from july onwards indian institute of technology jodhpur . introduction academic programmes at indian institute of technology, jodhpur are designed to develop the highest calibre human resource capable of understanding the new patterns of knowledge creation across disciplines obliterating traditional boundaries between science, humanities, social sciences and engineering. iit jodhpur aims to produce quality professionals who would be able to address profound and wide-ranging societal challenges of the st century such as energy, food, water, housing, mobility, and health. in addition to imparting scientific knowledge, iit jodhpur endeavours to inculcate human qualities of courage, integrity, fairness, humility and team effort among its graduates through curricular, co-curricular and extra-curricular activities on campus. the academic programmes focus on developing a temper for the life long process of learning, creative thinking and exploring. the postgraduate academic programmes focus on developing deep understanding of the subject of study coupled with creative inquisitiveness and the ability to address and solve new problems with free and objective mind. the academic programmes are based on three tenets of semester system, credit system and relative grading. these academic programmes are administered by a duly constituted academic committee ac through the office of academics. the ac will be chaired by dean academics . in the absence of dean academics , associate dean academics- pg associate dean academics- ug will discharge the responsibilities of dean academics . the senate of the institute has formulated a set of guidelines and rules to ensure high standard of performance as well as for smooth functioning of the academic programmes. within this broad set of guidelines, subject to the approval of senate, different programmes can include additional academic requirements as deemed necessary for that programme. these academic programmes are continuously monitored by the senate and make appropriate modifications improvements as and when necessary. . academic session the academic session normally runs from the end of july in one year to the middle of july in the next year. the academic session is divided into three parts: two regular semesters and a summer term as per the following timelines: semester i: from the fourth week of july to the last week of november semester ii: from the last week of december to the last week of april summer term: from the middle of may to the middle of july. excluding the days of the examinations, the total number of days of instruction in a semester is at least . . academic calendar the academic calendar gives the exact dates of all important events during the academic session, such as orientation, registration, the commencement of classes, adding and dropping of courses, submission of documents, examinations, submission of grades, project evaluation, declaration of results, mid-semester recess, and vacation. this calendar is approved by the senate. . registration a. registration: students are required to register for prescribed credits as per the programme, on the dates specified in the academic calendar. if the student does not register by the date of registration, she he can register by paying the fine and register before the date of late registration. b. provisional registration: a fresh student joining the institute, who is awaiting the final results of the qualifying examination, is allowed to register provisionally on submission of a certificate from her his last institute stating that she he has appeared in the final examination of the qualifying degree. the student is required to submit documents of having passed the qualifying examination by the last date given in the academic calendar for the registration to be regularized. c. late registration: if the student does not register by the date of late registration as mentioned in the academic calendar, he she will be deregistered. the appeal against deregistration may be made to chairman, senate through dean academics. the chairman senate may permit the continuation of registration on payment of an appropriate fine. d. adding and dropping of courses: a student may add or drop course s with approval of the faculty advisor till the last date of registration. e. withdrawing from a course: after the last date of add-drop, a student will have the option of withdrawing from a course. the last date of course withdrawal will be typically within four weeks from the beginning of the semester as specified in the academic calendar. the withdrawn course will be mentioned in the student s grade card with a letter grade w . f. cancellation of semester registration: absence for a period of four or more weeks during a semester shall result in automatic cancellation of the registration of a student from all the courses in that semester. g. summer course registration: a department may offer summer courses to enable the students to clear their backlog courses and or regular credit courses. a course will run during summer provided a faculty member s is available for running the course. the course is offered on approval of the dean associate dean. . teaching and evaluation . teaching . . medium of instruction the medium of instruction is english. . . course structure all courses have associated credits. credits of a course is based on the number of contact hours for lectures, tutorials, and practicals. a student on successful completion of the course with a passing grade will earn an equivalent number of credits. based on the required academic maturity level of students for attending a course, a course is assigned a level. a course can consist of independent components which can be completed independently. these components are called fractals. a course is identified by a unique number. following tables define all parameters related to the course numbering scheme. table . course code description course code m e l x x descriptions offering department idrp course type level of courses unique identification number indicates fractal categories see table . see table . see table . this code will be given centrally by the office of academics : regular : fractal : fractal : fractal note: examples of course codes course title l-t-p course code regular course engineering mechanics - - mel xx fractal course robotics - - mel xx fractal : robot modelling - - mel xx fractal : motion planning and programming - - mel xx fractal : robot control - - mel xx table . departmental code s. n. type department platform office department me mechanical engineering cs computer science and engineering ee electrical engineering ci civil and infrastructure engineering ch chemical engineering bb bioscience and bioengineering mt metallurgical materials engineering cy chemistry ma mathematics ph physics hs humanities and social science interdisciplinary research platforms idrps dh digital humanities ss space science and technology io internet of things and applications rm robotics and mobility systems qc quantum information and computation sh smart healthcare schools ms school of management entrepreneurship ai school of artificial intelligence data science sl school of liberal arts others oa office of academics os office of students table . types for courses s. n. course type category l lecture courses other than lecture hours, these courses can have tutorial and practical hours, e.g. l-t-p structures - - , - - , - - , - - , etc. p practical practice based courses where performance is evaluated primarily on the basis of practice, practical or laboratory work with ltp structures such as - - , - - , - - , - - , etc. d project based courses e.g. major, minor, mini projects n non-graded core component t thesis q seminar courses s independent study r product realization e engineering design graded and non-graded table . level of courses, category and credit requirements s. n. level category credit requirements courses for btech programmes btech cr btech cr btech cr preparatory courses of msc and mtech programmes not open to btech and btech mtech dual degree mtech cr m. sc. cr courses for msc programmes btech cr msc cr mtech cr courses for mtech programmes btech cr with cgpa msc cr mtech cr phd cr advanced courses for msc advanced courses for mtech and phd programmes, an level course should have level course as a pre-requisite mtech cr phd cr . . approval of courses the senate approves each course along with its weight in terms of credits. only the approved courses may be offered during any semester summer term. . . list of courses the list of courses to be offered in a program is finalized before the beginning of the semester, by the department hosting that program. . . categories of courses courses offered can be from one of the following categories: a regular course: a regular course has hours of classroom engagement per credit. a regular course can be under elective or core compulsory categories. elective courses of , , , , , or , level will run if a minimum of students register for the course. a or level elective course can run with a minimum of registered students. a course not running as a regular course may be offered as a self-study course as per the following section. b self-study course a self-study course will be from the list of courses approved by the senate. the main features of a self-study course are as follows: a student may be allowed to register for an elective course as a self-study course provided that the course is not running in that semester as a regular course or a student is not on campus during the course with prior approval of the competent authority. a student may also be permitted to register for a core or program compulsory course in self-study mode provided he she has failed in it earlier and the course is not being offered as a regular course during that semester or a student is not on campus during the course with prior approval of the competent authority. students should apply for a self-study course with the appropriate recommendation of a course coordinator and dugc drc interdisciplinary program committee. the final sanction of a self-study course to a student is made by the dean academics . formal classroom engagement may not be there for a self-study course but laboratory, design and computation exercises will be conducted if they form an integral part of the course. the course coordinator conducts the assessment as per the evaluation norms for the award of letter grade at the end of the semester. not exceeding of the total graded credit can be opted as a self-study course. a self-study course will appear with the approved course title on the transcript. c independent study course independent study enables a student to pursue course credit on an academic topic of interest under the supervision of a faculty member. the term independent does not mean not involving an instructor but independent of regular class engagement. self-discipline and having a sense of own direction and goals are fundamental requirements of an independent study course. a student having cgpa more than or equal to . can opt for independent study courses with the recommendation of the supervising professor. the main features of an independent-study course are as follows: a student may be permitted to register for a topic of interest as an independent-study course not exceeding credits in self-study mode at most once during the program. such an independent study course will be counted toward open elective requirements of the program and will appear with the title independent study on the transcript. students should apply for an independent study course with the appropriate recommendation of a course coordinator and dugc drc interdisciplinary program committee. the final sanction of an independent-study course to a student is made by the dean academics . normally, no formal lectures will be held for an independent study course but laboratory, design and computation exercises will be conducted if they form an integral part of the course. the course will be arranged, planned and managed by a supervising professor. the course coordinator conducts the assessment as per the evaluation norms for the award of letter grade at the end of the semester. . . conduct of courses each course is conducted by the instructor with the assistance of the required number of tutors, as needed. the instructor is responsible for conducting the course, evaluating the performance of students, awarding the grades at the end of the semester, and transmitting the grades as per subsection . . the student shall have access to his her answer paper s of all the written examinations conducted for a given course, which may be shown to him her by the instructor s concerned. the instructor must keep all evaluation records in his custody at least for the next six months. a course approved by the senate of iit jodhpur can be conducted through either i direct contact ii synchronized remote contact iii guided study mode or combination of these. in direct contact mode, coordinator or instructor will have a face-to-face physical interaction with the students. synchronized remote contact mode would require the faculty and or the students to be concurrently connected to the class-room interaction via electronic conferencing involving both audio and video communication. however, there has to be direct interaction between faculty and students for limited hours typically of the stipulated contact hours. in guided study mode, a faculty would guide a single or a group of students to take up study of an approved course via self-learning and discussion-oriented contact sessions. this mode can be also adopted for enabling a student to take up study of a new course, not yet approved by the senate, under supervision of a faculty. all formal evaluation components applicable to courses being run through any one of the above-mentioned modes will be conducted under direct physical supervision of a faculty. all laboratory components of a course requiring use of a specialized facility will be conducted through direct contact. . . teaching assignments the instructors and tutors for all courses to be offered during the semester are allocated by the head of the department hosting the program. when faculty members of other departments are also required to participate in teaching a particular course, the allocation shall be done in consultation with the head of that department. . . auditing of courses a student may audit a course in addition to the prescribed academic load requirement with the permission of dean academics on the recommendations of the instructor of the course being audited and the faculty advisor. under this arrangement, the course will be listed in the grade card of the student. . . attendance requirements a student should have full attendance in each course. unless the student takes leave of absence for valid reasons, the student has to attend every lecture, tutorial, or lab session. the attendance records must be made available to the student after every lecture. even if the student s attendance falls below , the student will be allowed to appear for the exams. students not meeting the attendance criterion of will be required to score at least c grade to pass a course. these students would be awarded f grade if their marks are lower than the cut-off for c grade in a course. . evaluation the performance of students in a course is evaluated continuously, using their interaction in the classroom, and performances in examinations, the laboratory work if any , and term-papers and projects. the performance of students in a course is evaluated through examinations and on a continuous basis. the senate will decide from time to time on the system of tests and examinations in each subject in each semester. minor , minor and major examinations are mandatory components of the evaluation of a regular -week long lecture course. the minor examinations shall be of minutes duration and the major examination of minutes. fractal courses less than credits must have at least one examination. the total weightage of the examination component three examinations for a -week long course shall be between to of the total weightage of evaluation measure. evaluation policy has to be known from the first day of the class. the continuous evaluation may include but not limited to interaction in the classroom, quizzes, assignments, tutorials, laboratory work, term papers and projects. . grading system . letter grades at the end of the semester, a student is awarded a relative letter grade in each course by the instructor offering the course considering the performance of the student during the semester with respect to those of the other students registered in the course. it is proposed that ten regular letter grades, namely a , a, a-, b, b-, c, c-, d, e and f shall be awarded in each course. each letter grade is associated with a numerical equivalent on a -point scale shown in table . . in addition, there are four special letter grades, namely, i, s, x and u, which stand for incomplete, satisfactory, thesis continuation and unsatisfactory, respectively. the faculty member shall upload grades on the portal as per stipulated time schedule. table . letter grade and its equivalent grade points s.n. letter grade grade points comment a exceptional a outstanding a- excellent b very good b- good c average c- below average d marginal e poor f fail i incomplete s satisfactory in course x thesis continuation u unsatisfactory w withdrawn a detailed description of some of the grades is given below: s.n. grades description a a grade has the same grade point as a grade. the grade a indicates exceptional performance and is awarded only in the course s in which the number of registered students is more than . it should not exceed of the total strength of the particular theory or lab course. the grade a is not awarded for projects seminars. e e grade will be awarded to a student who has scored marks less than the cutoff marks for d grade and has met the attendance criterion of the institute. students who obtain an e grade will be eligible to appear in an additional examination. if they perform satisfactorily, they become eligible for getting the e grade converted to a d grade, otherwise, they will continue to have e grade. the student will have only one chance to appear for the additional examination for an e grade. the additional examination will be conducted within the first week of the next semester. the date of additional examination of institute core courses for undergraduate students will be centrally notified, while for all other courses, the date would be announced by the respective course coordinators. a student can appear for a maximum of three such additional tests in a given semester. if a student cannot appear for the test due to any reason s , he she will not get any additional chance. if a student with e grade in a course does not pass the course through the additional test, or obtains an f grade in the course, he she has to repeat the course if it is a core course. in case the course is an elective, the student may take the same course again or any other course. e and f grades are not counted in the calculation of the cgpa; however, these are taken into account in the calculation of the sgpa. i an i grade is temporarily awarded to a student on his her request to denote incomplete performance in a course on approval of an instructor. an i grade is awarded in case of missing an evaluation component due to absence on medical grounds or other special circumstances. requests for i grade should be made at the earliest but not later than the last day of major tests. all evaluation requirements for such students in the corresponding course s should be completed on or before the last date of add and drop of courses specified in the academic calendar. upon completion of all course requirements, the i grade is converted to a regular grade. s this grade is awarded to a student with satisfactory performance in non-graded and audit courses or in a thesis after successful completion of the open seminar. the grades obtained in an audit course are not considered in the calculation of sgpa or cgpa. x this grade is awarded to a student in a course for continuation. u this grade is awarded to a student with unsatisfactory performance in thesis, audit or non-graded courses. w this grade is awarded to a student who has opted to withdraw from a course. withdrawal from a course is permitted until the date specified in the academics calendar. . procedure for declaration of results the following procedure would be followed for declaration of results and time line would be as per academic calendar. . evaluation scheme to be displayed by instructors at the start of a semester . display of answer sheets and all scores by instructors . finalization of grades by instructors . grade moderation by department institute level committee for department institute wide courses . recommendation of grades by the head of the department after scrutiny of grades by a department moderation committee . display of grades by instructors . grade correction, if any, within hours of display of grades after approval of the head of the department . approval of grade by the dean ug pg associate dean ug pgs . finalization of results by the dean ug pg associate dean ug pg . approval of results by the chairman senate . results once approved cannot be changed under any circumstance. in exceptional cases, an appeal may be made to the chairman, senate for reconsideration, with formal justification. . grade point averages . . semester grade point average the semester grade point average sgpa is a weighted average of the grades earned by a student in all courses credited by her him and reflects her his academic performance in the respective semester. if the grade points associated with the letter grades earned by a student in n courses registered during a semester are g , g , gn, and the corresponding credits c , c , cn, then the sgpa is given by the following formula: the sgpa is calculated on the basis of grades obtained in all courses, except audit courses and courses in which s x grade is awarded, registered in a particular semester. . . cumulative grade point average the cumulative grade point average cgpa indicates the overall academic performance of a student in all the courses registered up to the latest completed semester. the cgpa is computed similarly as the sgpa, considering all the courses in all semesters. the cgpa is calculated on the basis of all pass grades a , a, a-, b, b-, c, c-, d , except audit courses and courses in which s x grade is awarded, obtained in all completed semesters. the sgpa and cgpa calculation is based on credits earned completed at iit jodhpur alone. . grade card and transcript a grade card shall be issued to each student at the end of each semester, and a transcript at the end of the programme. iit jodhpur grade card and transcript will only indicate the courses, credits and grades completed at iit jodhpur and the total number of credits without grades earned in other academic institutions in a particular semester, if applicable. . waiver of requirements in special cases the rules and regulations procedures and requirements stated in this manual, other than those related to admissions to the academic programmes, may be waived in special circumstances by the ac on the recommendation of the department with the approval of chairman, senate. all such exceptions have to be reported to the senate. . make-up examinations a student who has missed minor s or the major examination due to genuine reasons like illness etc. may be permitted to write a make-up examination for the missed components. the student should make an application to the dean academics through the course instructor within ten days from the date of the missed examination, explaining the reasons for their absence. applications received after this period need not be entertained. the permission to take a make-up examination will be given under exceptional circumstances such as admission to a hospital due to illness. a student needs to produce the necessary document subject to one of the following categories: students residing in the hostels should produce a medical certificate issued by the medical officer of the institute that he she was admitted in the hospital during the period of the missed quiz exam. students residing in the hostels and taking medical consultation with outside doctors are required to obtain written permission from the medical officer of the institute hospital before they proceed for such consultation. students residing in the hostels but taking medical consultation with outside doctors are required to obtain an endorsement on the certificate of treatment by the medical officer of the institute hospital. a student staying outside the campus permanently temporarily must produce a medical certificate from the registered medical practitioner and the same should be duly endorsed by the parent guardian. a slot- wise make-up examination for major will be held during the makeup supplementary week as per academic calendar of the subsequent semester for those who are permitted to take the make-up examination. a student who misses this make-up examination will not normally be given another make-up examination. however, in exceptional cases of prolonged illness resulting in the student missing a make-up examination, the chairman of the senate, in consultation with the dean of academics may permit the student to appear for make-up examination any day before the end of the first week of the next semester. under no circumstances prorating can be done for the missed examinations or attendance. regulations for pg programme . postgraduate programmes the indian institute of technology jodhpur currently offers the following postgraduate programmes. . master of science msc . dual degree: msc-mtech . master of technology mtech . dual degree: mtech-phd. . doctor of philosophy phd . postgraduate admissions the process of admission for all the programs offered by the institute normally is underway during april-may for semester and during november-december for semester . in addition, the department may process applications for admissions to phd programs on a continuous basis and admit students as per the existing procedure. . categories of admission a candidate can be admitted in any one of the following categories i. full-time regular ii. full-time sponsored iii. part-time iv. external v. part-time online vi. part-time project sponsored vii. executive however, all categories are not applicable for all pg programs. further, programmes can be offered in a combination of these modes like fully sponsored part-time programs . i full-time regular an in campus student who can register for up to full credit permissible per semester. a student supported by a project of the institute will be considered a full-time regular student. ii full-time sponsored an in campus student who can register for up to full credit permissible per semester. the candidate is sponsored either by his her employer or by self. a self-sponsored candidate must have two years of relevant industrial r d academic experience. iii part-time a part-time student is a working professional who, while employed, attends regular classes as per schedule of the institute. the student must produce an noc from the employer for pursuing the programme at iit jodhpur. the student can register only for a limited number of credits as compared to a full-time regular student. iv external a student working in an industry r d establishment academic institution which is equipped with the necessary research and library facilities. the employer must relieve the student to stay in the campus to complete the minimum residency requirements. v part-time online a part-time online student is a working professional who, while employed, attends classes in a synchronous audio-visual mode as per the schedule of the institute including limited contact sessions. the student is expected to register for a limited number of credits per semester. the student will need to spend at least months in the campus before submission of the phd thesis distributed over the entire period of the programme as per the academic requirements. the student must produce a noc from the employer for pursuing the programme at iit jodhpur certifying that the employer will also provide access to resources for proper execution of the research work. vi part-time project sponsored a part-time candidate is a project student receiving fellowship at least at the moe stipulated rate being supported through research projects running in the institute. the student can register only for a limited number of credits as compared to a full-time regular student. the student is expected to receive the fellowship for a minimum of months. the student will be paying fees at the same rate as that of full time gate qualified candidates. the department will process the applications only if such a position is available in the respective m. tech. program. vii executive only for m. tech. a professional who can carry out complete the programme requirement in . an accelerated fashion minimum in months , or . accumulates credits as per convenience and petitions a degree in maximum of years. . part-time or full-time mode by attending courses offered in synchronized remote contact mode and limited direct interaction . eligibility for admission a. the eligibility conditions given below are the absolute minimum. departments may prescribe any requirements over and above, subject to the approval of the senate. a. the number of admissions that can be made to any program shall be decided by the senate from time to time. b. reservation of seats for various reserved categories shall be prescribed by the board of governors. . . admission to m. sc. program regular the admission to the msc programs offered by the institute will be through any one of the following two avenues. a the applicants qualified through the joint admission test for master jam organized by iits. b the applicants having a bachelor s degree in any relevant discipline or year program may be admitted based on written test and or interview conducted by iit jodhpur. the applicants under the category b must have a minimum of marks for gen obc for sc st category in aggregate or as specified by the university institute or a minimum cgpa of . for gen obc . for sc st category on the scale of ; with corresponding proportional requirements when the scales are other than on for example . for gen obc category . for sc st on a scale of or a first class as specified by the university institute. . . admission to msc mtech dual degree program regular the admission to the m. sc.-mtech dual degree programs offered by the institute will be through any one of the following two avenues. a the applicants qualified through the joint admission test for master jam organized by iits. b the applicants having a bachelor s degree in any relevant discipline or year program may be admitted based on written test and or interview conducted by iit jodhpur. the applicants under the category b must have a minimum of marks for gen obc for sc st category in aggregate or as specified by the university institute or a minimum cgpa of . for gen obc . for sc st category on the scale of ; with corresponding proportional requirements when the scales are other than on for example . for gen obc category . for sc st on a scale of or a first class as specified by the university institute. . . admission to mtech program regular a the applicant must have bachelor s degree in engineering or science year program or a master s degree in science, mca, pharmacy, medical sciences, agricultural sciences and veterinary sciences or in related field b a minimum of marks for gen obc for sc st category in aggregate or as specified by the university institute or a minimum cgpa of . for gen obc . for sc st category on the scale of ; with corresponding proportional requirements when the scales are other than on for example . for gen obc category . for sc st on a scale of or a first class as specified by the university institute. c the applicant must either have a valid gate score or exempted from gate as per mhrd circular or have qualified an equivalent national examination or have qualified in the written test and or interview conducted by iit jodhpur. . . admission to mtech program executive part-time external sponsored a the applicant must have bachelor s degree in engineering or science year program or a master s degree in science, mca, pharmacy, medical science, agricultural science and veterinary science or in related fields. b a minimum of marks for gen obc for sc st category in aggregate or as specified by the university institute or a minimum cgpa of . for gen obc . for sc st category on the scale of ; with corresponding proportional requirements when the scales are other than on for example . for gen obc category . for sc st on a scale of or a first class as specified by the university institute. c the applicant must have a minimum of two years work experience after qualifying degree in industry r d laboratories academic institutions at the time of registration to the program. however, the credit accumulation for the program may start immediately after the qualifying degree. petitioning for the degree can happen only year after registration. d the applicant must qualify written test and or interview conducted by iit jodhpur. . . admission to m .tech. phd dual degree program regular a the applicant must have bachelor s degree in engineering or science year program or a master s degree in science, mca, pharmacy, medical science, agricultural science and veterinary science or in related field b a minimum of marks for gen obc for sc st category in aggregate or as specified by the university institute or a minimum cgpa of . for gen obc . for sc st category on the scale of ; with corresponding proportional requirements when the scales are other than on for example . for gen obc category . for sc st on a scale of or a first class as specified by the university institute. c the applicant must either have a valid gate score or exempted from gate as per mhrd circular or have qualified an equivalent national examination or have qualified in the written test and or interview conducted by iit jodhpur. . . admission to phd program regular a candidates admitted in this category shall not be a registered student in any other academic program in india or abroad, and shall not be a full-time or part-time employee of any organization in india or abroad. b the applicant must have a master s degree in engineering, pharmacy, agricultural science, science, humanities, social sciences, management with at least marks or at least . cpi or cgpa for gen gen-ews obc for sc st , or c the applicant must have mbbs with md ms, bvsc with mvsc, bds with mds, bpth with mpth, both with moth or equivalent with at least marks or at least . cpi or cgpa for gen gen-ews obc for sc st in bachelor s degree, or d the applicant must have a bachelor s degree of minimum four year duration in engineering or science or medicine or pharmacy or agricultural science or veterinary science or equivalent with at least marks or at least . cpi or cgpa for gen obc for sc st . . . admission under any special scheme like quality improvement programme qip , defence personnel the procedures and criteria for admission of these candidates can be decided with the approval of chairman, senate. . . . admission of indian nationals residing abroad inra and foreign nationals inra candidates must have been residing abroad continuously for at least one year at the time of applying for admission. the applications of inra and foreign nationals may be processed by the departments as and when they are received or according to any schedule convenient to the department. the applications should be scrutinized to make sure that, both in terms of qualifications and attainment they are comparable with the candidates admitted in the general category. department will conduct vc based interview for ascertaining suitability of the candidate. the applications of foreign nationals, who are sponsored by the indian council of cultural relations iccr will be scrutinized by the department concerned to assess their suitability for admission to the programme. the department's recommendation will be sent to the chairperson, senate through the chairperson, ac. . . admission to phd sponsored external part-time a candidates admitted in this category shall not be a registered student in any other academic program in india or abroad. b the applicant must have a master s degree in engineering, pharmacy, agricultural science, science, humanities, social sciences, management with at least marks or at least . cpi or cgpa for gen gen-ews obc for sc st , or c the applicant must have mbbs with md ms, bvsc with mvsc, bds with mds, bpth with mpth, both with moth or equivalent with at least marks or at least . cpi or cgpa for gen gen-ews obc for sc st in bachelor s degree, or d the applicant must have a bachelor s degree of minimum four year duration in engineering or science or medicine or pharmacy or agricultural science or veterinary science or equivalent with at least marks or at least . cpi or cgpa for gen obc for sc st . e the applicant must have a minimum of two years work experience after qualifying degree in industry r d laboratories academic institutions at the time of registration to the program. f the applicant must qualify written test and or interview conducted by iit jodhpur. . admission of non-degree students a non-degree student is a student who is registered for a degree in a recognized institute or university in india or abroad, and who is officially sponsored by that institute or university to complete part of his her academic requirements at iit jodhpur. for that purpose, the non-degree student may carry out research or take courses for credit or otherwise or may use other academic facilities. any candidate can be admitted as a casual student for specific courses provided the candidate satisfies the minimum eligibility criteria specified in section . . the application must be routed through the office of dean r d. a casual student can register up to a maximum of credits in a semester. on successful completion of the course, students will be awarded with a course completion certificate and grade obtained. a casual student can also accumulate credits to petition for a certificate or a diploma from iit jodhpur. students so admitted will be governed by all rules, regulations and discipline of the institute. . reservation policy the reservation policy of the government of india will be followed. . pg registration . limits on registration maximum and minimum number of credits a student can register in different programs: msc: a msc student can register for a maximum of credits and a minimum of credits in a semester. mtech: a mtech student can register for maximum and minimum credits as per table . . table . maximum and minimum credits a mtech student can register for during the regular semester summer term : mtech student registered under different categories indicative maximum credits minimum credits regular semester executive accelerated executive normal executive slow-paced executive part time full-time regular sponsored external part-time summer term executive accelerated executive normal executive slow-paced full-time regular full-time sponsored external part-time mtech-phd dual degree direct phd joining after btech - the maximum and minimum credits that a mtech-phd dual degree direct phd student can register are equivalent to that of a mtech regular external part-time student. phd: a phd student can register for maximum and minimum credits as per table . . table . maximum and minimum credits a phd student can register for during the regular semester phd student registered under different categories indicative maximum credits before qualifier indicative maximum credits after qualifier minimum credits full-time regular external part-time . . registration kept alive rka a student admitted to a mtech program who has at least completed minimum credit requirement of the first semester, can keep his studentship alive while he is pursuing any professional activity, by opting for rka in subsequent semesters. the candidate must indicate his intent of rka before the last date of late registration through drc to dean academic . the candidate has to pay appropriate registration fees for rka status. . change of registration from mtech regular programme to mtech part-time programme a full-time regular mtech student may be allowed to change the registration to the part-time mtech programme after successful completion of third semester. a student requesting such a conversion must: i get the request endorsed by the supervisor s and the drc; and ii produce a no objection certificate from his her employer for carrying out the research work . change of registration from mtech programme to mtech-phd dual degree programme a regular student registered for the mtech programme having cgpa or more at the end of second semester may be allowed to switch to mtech-phd dual degree program till the end of third semester. as a special case, a student can switch to dual degree in the fourth semester with the approval of drc, provided his her cgpa is or more, who will then be required to complete his her candidacy requirements by the end of fifth semester. all conditions of the mtech-phd dual degree program will be applicable to all such students. all such changes of registration shall be reported to the senate. . change of registration from part-time mtech to part-time phd program a part-time mtech student having cgpa or more after completion of at least credits may be allowed to change his her registration to the phd program. the credits earned will be counted towards his her phd course work requirements. . change of registration from full-time to part-time external phd programme a student admitted to a full-time phd programme may be permitted to change to a part-time phd programme. a student requesting such a conversion must: i have successfully completed his her candidacy requirement; ii get the request endorsed by the supervisor s and the drc; iii produce a no objection certificate from his her employer for carrying out the research work. . maximum duration of a program msc - registered semester mtech regular and part-time external executive - registered semesters which may include maximum semesters of registration kept alive rka after completion of the first semester. tuition fee post rka will be the same as that of sponsored candidates. phd and mtech-phd dual degree regular and part-time external - registered semesters which may include maximum semesters of registration kept alive rka after completion of the two semesters. tuition fee post rka will be the same as that of sponsored candidates. students may request for rka to dean academics through drc. . course registration students will be eligible to register for courses as per the criterion specified in section . and table . . the drc irc must oversee that the student has not registered for a similar course during her his masters or bachelors program. . academic requirements . academic load calculation of credits for a course for pg programmes the total credits for a course is calculated by taking into account the number of lectures, tutorial, and practical hours l-t-p assigned as given in table . and . for msc and mtech phd programmes respectively. each credit is associated with the number of contact hours and the expected number of self-learning hours on an average to be spent by the student for each contact hour to meet academic demand of the course. table . ltp-structure and credit assignment for msc type l-t-p distribution of contact and beyond contact hours total credits tc th contact hours ch beyond contact hours bch total hours th hour of lecture - - hour of tutorial - - hour of lab - - . . . hour of project - - contact hour for a project refers to the involvement of students in the laboratory, discussion, etc. table . ltp-structure and credit assignment for mtech phd type l-t-p distribution of contact and beyond contact hours total credits tc th contact hours ch beyond contact hours bch total hours th hour of lecture - - hour of tutorial - - hour of lab - - . hour of project - - hour of thesis phd - - contact hour for a project refers to the involvement of students in the laboratory, discussion, etc. . course categories for masters programmes compulsory course mc programme compulsory pc programme elective me open elective mo oe specialization core sc specialization elective se specialization stream electives sse micro specialization core msc project works mp non-graded ng . academic credit requirements for msc students course categories and academic requirements for msc students are given below in table . . table . programs credits to be earned for msc students programs minimum credits to be earned mc me mo mp total msc chemistry msc mathematics msc physics msc digital humanities program minimum credits to be earned pc se sc oe mp total msc computational social science . academic credit requirements for mtech students executive mtech course categories and academic requirements for mtech students are given below in table . . table . minimum credits to be earned for mtech students programs minimum credits to be earned mc me mo mp ng total mtech sensors and internet of things mtech cyber physical system mtech thermofluids engineering mtech advanced manufacturing and design mtech materials engineering mtech artificial intelligence mtech computer science and engineering mtech bioscience and bioengineering mtech chemical engineering mtech intelligent vlsi systems programs minimum credits to be earned pc sse me mo mp ng total mtech infrastructure engineering with specialization in environmental engineering mtech civil and infrastructure engineering with major in energy program minimum credits to be earned mc msc me mo mp ng total mtech robotics and mobility systems . academic credit requirements for msc - mtech dual degree minimum credit requirements for msc-mtech dual degree is cumulative sum of credit requirements for respective msc program and mtech program as mentioned in sections . and . . mtech data and computational sciences mtech intelligent communication systems mtech augmented reality and virtual reality . academic credit requirements for mtech - phd dual degree course categories and academic requirements for mtech - phd dual degree students are given below in table . . table . minimum credits to be earned for dual degree mtech and phd students programs minimum credits to be earned mc me mo mp ng totalflfi programs minimum credits to be earned pc sse me mo mp ng total mtech-phd dual degree infrastructure engineering with specialization in environmental engineering mtech-phd dual degree civil and infrastructure engineering with major in energy the drc irc must oversee that the student has not registered for a similar course during bachelors program and take necessary corrective action by suggesting alternative courses. . academic credit requirements for phd students the minimum credits to be earned through courses, is listed in table . . table . credit requirements for phd students s.no. phd in with minimum credits through course work minimum credits through thesis work . engineering discipline mtech, m.e. or msc engineering in an engineering discipline msc degree in a science discipline btech, b.e. or bsc engineering in an engineering discipline . science, humanities or social science discipline msc, m.a. and m.phil. degree in a science, humanities or social science discipline mtech-phd dual degree sensors and internet of things mtech-phd dual degree cyber physical system mtech-phd dual degree communication and signal processing mtech-phd dual degree thermo uids engineering mtech-phd dual degree materials engineering mtech-phd dual degree computer science and engineering mtech-phd dual degree arti cial intelligence mtech-phd dual degree bioscience and bioengineering mtech-phd dual degree intelligent communication systems mtech-phd dual degree advanced manufacturing mtech-phd dual degree mechanical design mtech-phd dual degree data and computational sciences mtech-phd dual degree chemical engineering the indicative maximum credits, a student registers in a semester, are notional. in addition to the above minimum credit requirements through coursework, ph. d. students are further required to complete four compulsory non-graded ng courses before the open seminar. a student already completed a ng course as part of his her program need not register for the same course again. the coursework requirements for idrp phd students will be in line with table . . while securing the minimum overall cgpa requirement in phd in departmental domains phd in idrp domains with msc degree in a science discipline direct phd earned credits, a course repeat process may be allowed for a maximum of credits for phd students in departmental domains and credits for phd students in idrp domains with msc degree in a science discipline or for students enrolled in direct phd programme. the student can repeat course s within the said credit limit in which he has obtained a pass grade but performance is poor secured grade is b- or lower . no replacement of course s in which the student has secured pass grade and above is allowed. if the student opts to repeat a course, then the grade secured in the next attempt will prevail. . academic performance requirements . . minimum performance for continuation and graduation in a program the minimum cgpa requirement for continuation and graduation in a program is given below in table . . table . minimum cgpa requirements sr. no. program continuation in programme sgpa for graduation msc only graduation requirement refer . . . mtech . . dual degree msc and mtech . . dual degree mtech and phd . for first semester . phd . for first semester . at completion of course work . . degree grade point average dgpa for phd students a phd student who has completed the credit requirements for the course work but has a cgpa less than . required for graduation will be evaluated using degree grade point average dgpa where dgpa is defined with respect to the best performance of the student in minimum number of credits. . . continuing criteria for msc msc- the student must earn at least credits at the end of second semester for continuation in the program. . . minimum performance for continuation assistantship fellowship the minimum cgpa requirement for continuation assistantship fellowship is given in below table . table . minimum cgpa requirements for continuation of assistantship fellowship sr. no. program continuation of assistantship fellowship mtech . dual degree mtech and phd . phd . . leave rules application for leave of absence should be addressed to the convener drc, and submitted with a medical certificate, if applicable. usually, leave must not be availed of without prior approval of the drc. . leave a maximum of days in an academic year including leave on medical grounds mid semester break . the student must apply for leave in advance even during the summer winter term or mid-semester break. a phd student cannot avail leave for more than days at a stretch an mtech msc student cannot avail leave for more than days at a stretch the leave beyond days in an academic year may be granted in exceptional cases by drc without assistantship during that period. . other leaves maternity leave for phd students is sanctioned as per the directives of moe. it will not be counted towards maximum permissible duration of the programme. any other leave may also be permissible as per the guidelines of moe. . semester withdrawal may be applicable in unforeseen circumstances or for medical reasons. absence for a period of four or more weeks in any semester will result in automatic withdrawal from that semester. in all such cases, the fellowship will be stopped with immediate effect and it will be continued for only after the student rejoins the institute. drc can approve and intimate office of academics regarding the leave of the student for records. in case, the leave extends beyond a semester, it can only be approved through the academic committee. semester withdrawal on medical ground will not be counted towards maximum permissible duration of the programme for the student. . academic leave academic leave can be requested for any of the following reasons, such as . field work . library work- because of a specialized collection at a particular library . experimental work training using specialized facility not available at iitj . attending conferences workshops summer winter schools symposium . collaborative work as part of joint mtech phd supervision . collaborative work for a specific problem related to his ongoing phd programme as indicated in his research proposal . exchange program as part of an exchange program with sister institution in india or abroad all such requests must be evaluated and approved by src drc irc before the leave is granted. src drc irc must also make recommendations regarding continuation of fellowship during academic leave. a student may be allowed to spend a maximum duration of one year on academic leave. a student during academic leave can earn a maximum of credits per semester as certified by src and approved by drc. . financial assistance financial assistantship scholarship will be provided to the eligible students admitted under regular full-time program. the eligibility criteria are as per the following: . msc program merit-cum-means fellowship as per institute norms. . msc-mtech dual-degree program a student having completed minimum credit requirements of a msc program at the end of second year with a. cgpa or b. have qualified gate can have financial support from mhrd or project fund. . mtech program a regular mtech student with gate can have financial support from mhrd or project fund. a student may be exempted from gate as per mhrd guidelines. . executive m tech program students admitted in this category will not be provided any financial assistance from the institute. . mtech phd dual degree program rules and regulations governing financial assistance for dual degree students will be at par with regular phd students. . phd program a regular phd student admitted to the institute will be eligible for financial assistance as per the norms of iit jodhpur. a. a candidate having btech b.s. four-year program master's degree with gate net jrf nbhm or equivalent can have financial assistance as per mhrd norms. b. the requirement of gate is exempted for an applicant with mtech or equivalent post-bachelor s degree c. a student may be exempted from gate as per mhrd guidelines. a phd student would be eligible for enhancement in the scholarship after two years provided the student has met the qualifier requirement. enhanced fellowship will commence from the date of completion of both the conditions. no arrears will be provided due to delay in completing the qualifier requirement. no arrears will be provided due to delay in completing the above requirements. the teaching research assistantship of a phd student will continue till thesis defense or end of the semester in which he she has submitted thesis, whichever is earlier. the above is permissible subject to assistantship fellowship available in the semester under question as per mhrd csir dst ugc rule. . rules and regulation for conduct and evaluation of mtech msc project allotment of students to supervisors will be made based on the preferences of the students and supervisor s . the supervisor and area identification must be completed by the end of the first semester. coordinator, m. tech. program would advise until the student is assigned to regular supervisor s . each semester a letter grade will be awarded after examination by a committee consisting of drc, supervisor s and two members conversant with the field of research with at least one-member external to the department may be outside the institute also . drc will appoint examiners in consultation with the supervisor. same committee may examine more than one thesis. the external member can be on vc. drc will ensure that the award of letter grade would be as per relative grading policy. a regular full-time student must register for mtech project part- in the summer semester following nd semester. he must obtain a satisfactory grade to continue mtech project part- in the next semester. his performance in the summer semester will be evaluated by his supervisor. . rules and regulations for ph. d. m. tech.-ph. d. dual degree program . thesis supervisor s . . selection of phd candidates the selection should be based on merit and capability of the candidate to conduct research. there should at least be a faculty member available or likely to join in the areas of interest of the candidate at the time of selection. . . appointment of thesis supervisor s ph. d. students shall be admitted in the department and no supervisor shall be assigned at the time of selection. allotment of students to supervisor s will be made based on the preferences of the students and supervisor s . for both ph. d. and m. tech. - ph. d. dual degree supervisor s and area identification must be completed by the end of the first semester. the convener, drc department research and postgraduate committee coordinator, irc interdisciplinary research program committee would advise until the student is assigned to regular supervisor s . there shall not be more than two supervisors, in general, for a student. additional supervisor can be allowed with the approval of chairman, senate. a supervisor from outside the institute, before qualifier, may be appointed on the request of student supervisor s with the recommendation of the drc irc and the dean academics and approval of the chairman, senate. the external supervisor will be requested to sign intellectual property right ipr and non-disclosure agreement nda documents as a part of acceptance. from the financial point of view the institute will have no obligation to the external supervisor. . . caretaker supervisor additional supervisor whenever the supervisor proceeds on short leave for a period up to one year, the drc irc shall appoint a caretaker supervisor in consultation with the supervisor and the student to take care of the administrative requirements. whenever the supervisor proceeds on long leave for a period more than a year, then an additional supervisor needs to be appointed on the suggestion of the supervisor. the supervisor going on lien or sabbatical may continue supervising students and the supervisor can opt for either an additional supervisor or a caretaker supervisor. the supervisor on his her retirement or on resignation may continue as supervisor and will have to opt for an additional supervisor provided the student has cleared the qualifier before supervisor s retirement resignation. . . composition of departmental research committee drc the drc will consist of coordinators of mtech, mtech-phd dual degree and phd programs of the department, head of the department and senior professor associate professor proposed by the head. the drc will be chaired by a professor associate professor nominated by the head of the department. the chairman of the drc will be a member of the academic committee. the drc has to be approved by the dean academics . phd program coordinator will be the convenor of drc and will be proposed by the head. the tenure for the drc will be years. . . composition of interdisciplinary research committee irc the irc will consist of all coordinators of idrps and senior professor associate professor as the chairman of the irc will be nominated by dean academics . the chairman of irc will be a member of ac. one of the idrp co-ordinators would be convenor of the committee. the tenure for the irc will be years. the irc will be approved by the dean academics . . change of research supervisor change of supervisor s under exceptional circumstances shall be permitted by dean academics on recommendation of the drc irc after obtaining the consent of i the student ii the present supervisor s and iii the proposed supervisor s . if required, realignment of student s research program will happen under supervision of the drc irc. . student research committee src . . composition of src the src will normally consist of supervisor s and three other faculty members conversant with the field of research with at least one-member external to the department may be outside the institute also . a student research committee src for the candidate shall be proposed by the supervisor s , recommended by the drc irc and approved by the dean academics . the src shall have one member identified as chairman for administrative functions and the supervisor s will act as convener. chairman, src is to be appointed by dean academics . the appointment of src should be completed by the end of the first semester. any subsequent changes in the composition of src shall be communicated through the drc irc to dean academics for record. the src and supervisor s shall be the internal examiners for the evaluation of the thesis. the src is expected to monitor the progress of the candidate until the completion of the program. . annual progress monitoring meeting apm academic progress of all registered phd students will be reviewed once in a year by the src and peers in the institute. the review will be based upon i annual progress report and ii a poster presentation open to all. src will award satisfactory non-satisfactory grade based upon i and ii . two consecutive non-satisfactory grades will lead to termination of registration. for implementational convenience, the academic calendar must indicate two days in a year for conducting annual progress evaluation of research scholars. following groupings of students and scheduling guidelines are suggested . for students joining in st semester of ay: apm must be conducted by the last working date of september of every year . for students joining in nd semester of ay: apm must be conducted by the last working date of february of every year the first apm will be conducted after successful completion of qualifier requirements. those students who have got months extension to complete qualifier requirements, for them apm can be scheduled even after a semester from the date of completion of qualifier requirements. each semester satisfactory progress or unsatisfactory progress will be reported by supervisor s through the src for record. any situation in exception to the above will be processed by the academic committee and approved by dean academics . qualifier requirements of phd student the following four components together will constitute qualifier candidacy requirements for a ph. d. student and for a ph. d. candidate to be eligible for the enhanced srf fellowship. . completed course requirements with the minimum cgpa specified in section . . . cleared comprehensive examination . successful presentation on state of the art of the chosen field of research . successful presentation and defense of research proposal the ph. d. students are normally expected to complete successfully the qualifier requirements before the beginning of the fifth semester of his her registration in the ph. d. program and in any case not later than the beginning of the sixth semester after their registration in the ph. d. program. part-time and direct phd candidates will need to complete qualifier requirements before the beginning of the seventh semester. mtech-phd candidates will need to complete qualifier requirements before the beginning of the fifth semester and in any case not later than the beginning of the sixth semester after their registration in the program. for mtech-phd dual degree students, the credits associated with the mtech project ii are to be converted to the rp. . . comprehensive examination of ph. d. mtech-phd student the comprehensive examination must be designed to test the general capability of the student and the breadth of his her knowledge in the discipline and areas related to the field of research. the comprehensive examination shall be conducted by a comprehensive examination committee of the department idrp. the comprehensive examination will consist of a written test with three papers. departments will offer at least papers for conducting the comprehensive examination. each paper will have broad coverage of one essential sub-area of the department. course content of these papers will be approved by the academic committee and senate. the syllabus of papers for the comprehensive examination will not be the same as courses offered by the department; it must be designed to test the breadth of the knowledge in that area. the src will specify a set of three papers as comprehensive requirements for a particular student. these three papers may be selected from across the departments. the comprehensive examination requirements shall be intimated to the phd student within two weeks of src formation. all comprehensive examinations will be scheduled on two fixed days in a year. it can coincide with the annual progress evaluation day of doctoral candidates. students may decide to appear for three papers on the same day or on different days. a student can appear in the comprehensive examination before he she has completed the course requirements and satisfied the minimum specified cgpa requirement. if the performance of the phd student in a comprehensive examination paper in the first attempt is not satisfactory, he she will be given one more opportunity to appear during the next scheduled comprehensive examination as per the academic calendar. for valid medical or unforeseen reasons, if a student is not able to register for the comprehensive examination, the comprehensive examination may be rescheduled within that semester with prior approval to the dean associate dean pg- programs . for clearing the comprehensive examination, a student must perform satisfactorily in all papers. comprehensive examination to be completed by the students: phd: within semesters direct phd and part-time phd: within semesters . . state of art seminar sota every phd student is required to give a general seminar in the department covering the state of art of the area of research. the presentation must also include patent landscaping of the area. the presentation will be evaluated by the src. a candidate must have a satisfactory grade in sota awarded by src for becoming eligible to present his research proposal. the state of the art seminar must be completed before finalization of the research proposal. for mtech-phd students, the presentation in mtech project i will be considered as sota. . . research proposal research proposal report presentation will be evaluated by src after successful completion of sota. the research proposal must include representative research work equivalent to research work worth credits. src will allocate a letter grade based on the performance of the candidate. . candidacy for the phd degree a student enrolled in the phd program is formally admitted to the candidacy for the phd degree after he she has completed the qualifier requirements for the degree. only such students who are admitted to the candidacy will be allowed to submit phd thesis. the time-lines for comprehensive examination, state of the art seminar and candidacy examination are summarized in table . . table . timelines for comprehensive examination, state of the art seminar and candidacy examination sr. no. phd regular phd part-time phd direct mtech-phd comprehensive examination semesters semesters semesters semesters state-of-the-art seminar semesters semesters semesters semesters candidacy examination semesters semesters semesters semesters . relaxation in mtech -phd dual degree program mtech-phd dual degree students who have successfully completed all qualifier requirements, under exceptional conditions, as approved by src after years can also convert into part-time external phd students and exit with mtech degree if all conditions for part-time external conversion are satisfied. the renewal of their registration for every semester however, will be considered only if src finds their progress to be satisfactory and recommends continuance of registration. . cancellation of registration the registration of a student whose progress is not found to be satisfactory by the src or who has not enrolled will be liable for cancellation. the registration of a student who has not submitted his her thesis before the end of the maximum permissible period specified in section . will be liable for cancellation. . synopsis synopsis will consist of an open seminar and a comprehensive internal close door assessment of the research work, through a pre-synopsis report, by src. the student can submit the synopsis only if the src is satisfied about the quality and quantity of the work for submission as a phd thesis. publications arising out of the thesis are to be submitted along with the pre-synopsis report. students should submit the synopsis and thesis within six months of the open seminar date. if required, an extension of three months may be permitted by dean academics on the recommendation of src. if the synopsis and thesis are not submitted in the specified period, the student will be asked to present the synopsis again. on satisfactory completion of the prescribed courses with minimum cgpa specified in . . , the comprehensive examination, the sota, the research work and the synopsis, the student shall submit the requisite copies of the synopsis of his her research work in the required format through the supervisor s and hod to the academic section for consideration of the src. the student should have at least two publications in scopus indexed journals and or a conferences for engineering and science departments. requirements for the department of humanities and school of management entrepreneurship will be specified separately. . thesis submission and evaluation the supervisor s shall propose a list of examiners consisting of at least four faculty members from abroad and faculty members from india, who have the expertise in the area in which the student undertook research. for selecting an examiner, following guidelines should be followed the examiners shall have at least years post-phd experience; no two proposed examiners shall be from the same organization; and the examiners can be faculty members or scientists, of standing and repute. chairman, senate may ask for additional names for examiners. the chairman, senate, shall select minimum two examiners from the proposed list, of which at least one should be an examiner from outside india. the consent of these examiners shall be taken before sending the thesis to them. in addition, the src and supervisor s shall be the examiners of the thesis. the indian examiners shall attend in person the thesis defense. the examiners shall submit a written report on the thesis within a period of two months from the date of receipt of the thesis. if both examiners declare the thesis as acceptable for award of phd degree, the dean academics shall request the supervisor s to hold the thesis defense by the student. if any of the examiners rejects the thesis for the award of the phd degree, the dean academics shall report the matter to the chairman, senate, for further consideration. the chairman, senate, will refer the thesis to a third examiner under special circumstances; else the registration of the student shall stand cancelled in the phd program. if both examiners reject the thesis for the award of the phd degree, no degree shall be awarded by the institute, and the registration of the student shall stand cancelled in the phd program. if an examiner suggests revision of the thesis, the student shall resubmit the thesis after the revision within a prescribed time period of months in consultation with the supervisor s . when both examiners recommend the thesis as accepted for the student to defend the thesis, or after the resubmission of the thesis after incorporating the suggestions corrections given by the examiners, the student shall publicly present the thesis and defend the contention of the thesis. the committee consisting of chairman src, supervisor s , the examiner from within india and other faculty members, who participated in the comprehensive examination of the student, shall evaluate the thesis defense of the phd student also. on their recommendation, dean academics shall recommend to the senate, to consider the award of phd degree to the student. . graduation requirements a student is deemed to have completed the requirements for graduation, if she he has met the requirements laid down in clauses . to . below. . minimum residential requirement table . minimum residential requirement s.no. program qualifications at the time of joining the program minimum duration in semesters of residence . msc all qualifying degrees . msc-mtech dual degree all qualifying degrees . mtech programs full-time regular sponsored all qualifying degrees part-time part-time executive all qualifying degrees executive all qualifying degrees . ph. d. programs engineering discipline mtech, m.e. or msc engineering in an engineering discipline msc degree in a science discipline btech, b.e. or bsc engineering in an engineering discipline science, humanities or social science discipline msc, m.a. and m.phil. degree in a science, humanities or social science discipline part-time all qualifying degrees external all qualifying degrees . academic the student shall be declared to have fulfilled the academic requirements if she he has earned the minimum credits as per section . for m. sc., section . for m. tech., section . for m. sc.-mtech dual degree, section . for mtech-phd dual degree and section . for phd, while meeting the minimum cgpa requirements as mentioned in section . . . no dues clearance the degree will be awarded after obtaining no dues clearance from all concerned sections as deemed necessary by dean academics . . no case of disciplinary action the student shall not be considered to have completed the academic requirements if there is any case of indiscipline pending against her him. . award of degrees . . provisional certificate a student, who completes all the graduation requirements specified in clauses . to . , can be provided a provisional certificate by the office of dean academics on the approval of chairman, senate. . . degree certificate a student, who completes all the graduation requirements specified in clauses . to . , is recommended by the senate to the board of governors bog for the award of the appropriate degree in the ensuing convocation. the degree can be awarded only after the bog accords its approval. . withdrawal of degree under extremely exceptional circumstances, where gross violation of the graduation requirements is detected at a later stage, the senate may recommend to the board of governors for withdrawal of a degree already awarded to the student. . amendments notwithstanding anything contained in this document, the senate of iit jodhpur reserves the right to modify amend, without notice, rules and regulations of the postgraduate programmes at iit-jodhpur.
academic programmes rules regulations for students enrolled from july onwards indian institute of technology jodhpur . introduction academic programmes at indian institute of technology, jodhpur are designed to develop the highest calibre human resource capable of understanding the new patterns of knowledge creation across disciplines obliterating traditional boundaries between science, humanities, social sciences and engineering. iit jodhpur aims to produce quality professionals who would be able to address profound and wide-ranging societal challenges of the st century such as energy, food, water, housing, mobility, and health. in addition to imparting scientific knowledge, iit jodhpur endeavours to inculcate human qualities of courage, integrity, fairness, humility and team effort among its graduates through curricular, co-curricular and extra-curricular activities on campus. the undergraduate academic programmes focus on developing a temper for the life long process of learning, creative thinking and exploring. the postgraduate academic programmes focus on developing a deep understanding of the subject of study coupled with creative inquisitiveness and the ability to address and solve new problems with a free and objective mind. the academic programmes are based on three tenets of semester system, credit system and relative grading. these academic programmes are administered by a duly constituted academic committee ac through the office of academics. the ac will be chaired by dean academics . in the absence of dean academics , associate dean academics- pg associate dean academics- ug will discharge the responsibilities of dean academics . the senate of the institute has formulated a set of guidelines and rules to ensure a high standard of performance as well as for smooth functioning of the academic programmes. within this broad set of guidelines, subject to the approval of senate, different programmes can include additional academic requirements as deemed necessary for that programme. these academic programmes are continuously monitored by the senate and make appropriate modifications improvements as and when necessary. . academic session the academic session normally runs from the end of july in one year to the middle of july in the next year. the academic session is divided into three parts: two regular semesters and a summer term as per the following timelines: semester i: from the fourth week of july to the last week of november semester ii: from the last week of december to the last week of april summer term: from the middle of may to the middle of july. excluding the days of the examinations, the total number of days of instruction in a semester is at least . . academic calendar the academic calendar gives the exact dates of all important events during the academic session, such as orientation, registration, the commencement of classes, adding and dropping of courses, submission of documents, examinations, submission of grades, project evaluation, declaration of results, mid-semester recess, and vacation. this calendar is approved by the senate. . registration a. registration: students are required to register for prescribed credits as per the programme, on the dates specified in the academic calendar. if the student does not register by the date of registration, she he can register by paying the fine and register before the date of late registration. b. provisional registration: a fresh student joining the institute, who is awaiting the final results of the qualifying examination, is allowed to register provisionally on submission of a certificate from her his last institute stating that she he has appeared in the final examination of the qualifying degree. the student is required to submit documents of having passed the qualifying examination by the last date given in the academic calendar for the registration to be regularized. c. late registration: if the student does not register by the date of late registration as mentioned in the academic calendar, he she will be deregistered. the appeal against deregistration may be made to chairman, senate through dean academics. chairman senate may permit the continuation of registration on payment of an appropriate fine. d. adding and dropping of courses: a student may add or drop course s with approval of the faculty advisor till the last date of registration. e. withdrawing from a course: after the last date of add-drop, a student will have the option of withdrawing from a course. the last date of course withdrawal will be typically within four weeks from the beginning of the semester as specified in the academic calendar. the withdrawn course will be mentioned in the student s grade card with a letter grade w . f. cancellation of semester registration: absence for a period of four or more weeks during a semester shall result in automatic cancellation of the registration of a student from all the courses in that semester. g. summer course registration: a department may offer summer courses to enable the students to clear their backlog courses and or regular credit courses. a course will run during summer provided a faculty member s is available for running the course. the course is offered on approval of the dean. . teaching and evaluation . teaching . . medium of instruction the medium of instruction is english. . . course structure all courses have associated credits. credits of a course are based on the number of contact hours for lectures, tutorials, and practicals a student on successful completion of the course with a passing grade will earn an equivalent number of credits. based on the required academic maturity level of students for attending a course, a course is assigned a level. a course can consist of independent components which can be completed independently. these components are called fractals. a course is identified by a unique number. following tables define all parameters related to course numbering scheme. table . course code description course code m e l x x descriptions offering department idrp course type level of courses unique identification number indicates fractal categories see table . see table . see table . this code will be given centrally by the office of academics : regular : fractal : fractal : fractal note: examples of course codes course title l-t-p course code regular course engineering mechanics - - mel xx fractal course robotics - - mel xx fractal : robot modelling - - mel xx fractal : motion planning and programming - - mel xx fractal : robot control - - mel xx table . departmental code s. n. type department platform office department me mechanical engineering cs computer science and engineering ee electrical engineering ci civil and infrastructure engineering ch chemical engineering bb bioscience and bioengineering mt metallurgical materials engineering cy chemistry ma mathematics ph physics hs humanities and social science interdisciplinary research platforms idrps dh digital humanities ss space science and technology io internet of things and applications av autonomous unmanned vehicles auv qc quantum information and computation cg cognitive science sh smart healthcare others oa office of academics os office of students table . types for courses s. n. course type category l lecture courses other than lecture hours, these courses can have tutorial and practical hours, e.g. l-t-p structures - - , - - , - - , - - , etc. p practical practice-based courses where performance is evaluated primarily on the basis of practice, practical or laboratory work with ltp structures such as - - , - - , - - , - - , etc. d project-based courses e.g. major, minor, mini projects n non-graded core component t thesis q seminar courses s independent study r engineering innovation e engineering design graded and non-graded table . level of courses, category and credit requirements s. n. level category credit requirements courses for btech programmes btech cr btech cr btech cr preparatory courses of msc and mtech programmes not open to btech and btech mtech dual degree mtech cr m. sc. cr courses for msc programmes btech cr msc cr mtech cr courses for mtech programmes btech cr msc cr mtech cr phd cr advanced courses for msc advanced courses for mtech and phd programmes, an level course should have level course as a pre-requisite mtech cr phd cr . . approval of courses the senate approves each course along with its weight in terms of credits. only the approved courses may be offered during any semester summer term. . . list of courses the list of courses to be offered in a program is finalized before the beginning of the semester, by the department hosting that program. . . categories of courses courses offered can be from one of the following categories: a regular course: a regular course has hours of classroom engagement per one credit. a regular course can be under elective or core compulsory categories. elective courses of , , , , , or , level will run if a minimum of students registers for the course. a or level elective course can run with a minimum of registered students. a course not running as a regular course may be offered as a self-study course as per the following section. b self-study course a self-study course will be from the list of courses approved by senate. the main features of a self-study course are as follows: a student may be allowed to register for an elective course as a self-study course provided that the course is not running in that semester as a regular course or a student is not on campus during the course with prior approval of the competent authority. a student may also be permitted to register for a core or program compulsory course in self-study mode provided he she has failed in it earlier and the course is not being offered as a regular course during that semester or a student is not on campus during the course with prior approval of the competent authority. students should apply for a self-study course with the appropriate recommendation of a course coordinator and dugc drc irc. the final sanction of a self-study course to a student is made by the dean academics . formal classroom engagement may not be there for a self-study course but laboratory, design and computation exercises will be conducted if they form an integral part of the course. the course coordinator conducts the assessment as per the evaluation norms for the award of letter grade at the end of the semester. a self-study course will appear with the approved course title on the transcript. not exceeding of the total graded credit can be opted as a self-study course. c independent study course independent study enables a student to pursue course credit on an academic topic of interest under the supervision of a faculty member. the term independent does not mean not involving an instructor but independent of regular class engagement. self-disciplined and having a sense of own direction and goals are fundamental requirements of an independent study course. a student having cgpa more than or equal to . can opt for independent study courses with the recommendation of supervising professor. the main features of an independent-study course are as follows: a student may be permitted to register for a topic of interest as an independent-study course not exceeding credits in self-study mode at most once during the program. such independent study course will be counted toward open elective requirements of the program and will appear with the title independent study on the transcript. students should apply for an independent study course with the appropriate recommendation of a course coordinator and dugc drc irc. the final sanction of an independent-study course to a student is made by the dean academics . normally, no formal lectures will be held for an independent study course but laboratory, design and computation exercises will be conducted if they form an integral part of the course. the course will be arranged, planned and managed by a supervising professor. the course coordinator conducts the assessment as per the evaluation norms for the award of letter grade at the end of the semester. . . conduct of courses each course is conducted by the instructor with the assistance of the required number of tutors, as needed. the instructor is responsible for conducting the course, evaluating the performance of students, awarding the grades at the end of the semester, and transmitting the grades as per subsection . . the student shall have access to his her answer paper s of all the written examinations conducted for a given course, which may be shown to him her by the instructor s concerned. the instructor must keep all evaluation records in his custody at least for the next six months. a course approved by the senate of iit jodhpur can be conducted through either i direct contact ii synchronized remote contact iii guided study mode or combination of these. in direct contact mode, coordinator or instructor will have a face to face physical interaction with the students. synchronized remote contact mode would require the faculty and or the students to be concurrently connected to the classroom interaction via electronic conferencing involving both audio and video communication. however, there has to be direct interaction between faculty and students for limited hours typically of the stipulated contact hours. in guided study mode, a faculty would guide a single or a group of students to take up the study of an approved course via self-learning and discussion-oriented contact sessions. this mode can be also adopted for enabling a student to take up study of a new course, not yet approved by the senate, under the supervision of a faculty. all formal evaluation component applicable to courses being run through any one of the above-mentioned modes will be conducted under direct physical supervision of a faculty. all laboratory component of a course requiring the use of the specialized facility will be conducted through direct contact. . . teaching assignments the instructors and tutors for all courses to be offered during the semester are allocated by the head of the department hosting the program. when faculty members of other departments are also required to participate in teaching a particular course, the allocation shall be done in consultation with the head of that department. . . auditing of courses a student may audit a course in addition to the prescribed academic load requirement with the permission of dean academics on the recommendations of instructor of the course being audited and the faculty advisor. under this arrangement, the course will be listed in the grade card of the student. . . attendance requirements a student should have full attendance in each course. unless the student takes leave of absence for valid reasons, the student has to attend every lecture, tutorial, or lab session. the attendance records must be made available to the student after every lecture. even if the student s attendance falls below , the student will be allowed to appear for the exams. students not meeting the attendance criterion of will be required to score at least c grade to pass a course. these students would be awarded f grade if their marks are lower than the cut-off for c grade in a course. . evaluation the performance of students in a course is evaluated continuously, using their interaction in the classroom, and performances in examinations, the laboratory work if any , and term-papers and projects. the performance of students in a course is evaluated through examinations and on a continuous basis. the senate will decide from time to time on the system of tests and examinations in each subject in each semester. minor , minor and major examinations are mandatory components of the evaluation of a regular -week long lecture course. the minor examinations shall be of minutes duration and the major examination of minutes. fractal courses less than credits must have at least one examination. the total weightage of examination component three examinations for a week-long course shall be between to of the total weightage of evaluation measure. evaluation policy has to be known from the first day of the class. the continuous evaluation may include but not limited to interaction in the classroom, quizzes, assignments, tutorials, laboratory work, term papers and projects. . grading system . letter grades at the end of the semester, a student is awarded a relative letter grade in each course by the instructor offering the course considering the performance of the student during the semester with respect to those of the other students registered in the course. it is proposed that ten regular letter grades, namely a , a, a-, b, b-, c, c-, d, e and f shall be awarded in each course. each letter grade is associated with a numerical equivalent on a -point scale shown in table . . in addition, there are four special letter grades, namely, i, s, x and u, which stand for incomplete, satisfactory, thesis continuation and unsatisfactory, respectively. the faculty member shall upload grade on the portal as per the stipulated time schedule. table . letter grade and its equivalent grade points s.n. letter grade grade points comment a exceptional a outstanding a- excellent b very good b- good c average c- below average d marginal e poor f fail i incomplete s satisfactory in course x thesis continuation u unsatisfactory w withdrawn a detailed description of some of the grades is given below: s.n. grades description a a grade has the same grade point as a grade. the grade a indicates exceptional performance and is awarded only in the course s in which the number of registered students is more than . it should not exceed of the total strength of the particular theory or lab course. the grade a is not awarded for projects seminars. e e grade will be awarded to a student who has scored marks less than the cutoff marks for d grade and has met the attendance criterion of the institute. students who obtain an e grade will be eligible to appear in an additional examination. if they perform satisfactorily, they become eligible for getting the e grade converted to a d grade, otherwise, they will continue to have e grade. the student will have only one chance to appear for the additional examination for an e grade. the additional examination will be conducted within the first week of the next semester. the date of additional examination of institute core courses for undergraduate students centrally notified, while for all other courses, the date would be announced by the respective course coordinators. a student can appear for a maximum of three such additional tests in a given semester. if a student cannot appear for the test due to any reason s , he she will not get any additional chance. if a student with e grade in a course does not pass the course through the additional test, or obtains an f grade in the course, he she has to repeat the course if it is a core course. in case the course is elective, the student may take the same course again or any other course. e and f grades are not counted in the calculation of the cgpa; however, these are taken into account in the calculation of the sgpa. i an i grade is temporarily awarded to a student on his her request to denote incomplete performance in a course on approval of instructor. an i grade is awarded in case missing an evaluation component due to absence on medical grounds or other special circumstances. requests for i grade should be made at the earliest but not later than the last day of major tests. all evaluation requirements for such students in the corresponding course s should be completed before the end of the first week of the next semester. upon completion of all course requirements, the i grade is converted to a regular grade. s this grade is awarded to a student with satisfactory performance in non-graded and audit courses. if the stipulated requirements are not fulfilled, the unsatisfactory u grade is awarded. the grades obtained in an audit course are not considered in the calculation of sgpa or cgpa. x this grade is awarded to a student with satisfactory performance in thesis for continuation u this grade is awarded to a student with unsatisfactory performance in thesis, audit or non-graded courses. w this grade is awarded to a student who has opted to withdraw from a course. withdrawal from a course is permitted until the date specified in the academics calendar. . procedure for declaration of results the following procedure would be followed for declaration of results and timeline would be as per academic calendar. . evaluation scheme to be displayed by instructors at the start of a semester: . display of answer sheets and all scores by instructors. . finalization of grades by instructors . grade moderation by department institute level committee for department institute-wide courses . recommendation of grades by the head of the department after scrutiny of grades by a moderation committee . display of grades by instructors . grade correction, if any, within hours of display of grades after approval of the head of the department . approval of grade by the dean ug pg . finalization of results by the dean ug pg . approval of results by the chairman senate . results once approved cannot be changed under any circumstance. in exceptional cases, the student may appeal to the chairman, senate for reconsideration, with formal justification. . grade point averages . . semester grade point average the semester grade point average sgpa is a weighted average of the grades earned by a student in all the courses credited by her him and reflects her his academic performance in the respective semester. if the grade points associated with the letter grades earned by a student in n courses registered during a semester are g , g , g n , and the corresponding credits c , c , c n , then the sgpa is given by the following formula: the sgpa is calculated on the basis of grades obtained in all courses, except audit courses and courses in which s x grade is awarded, registered in a particular semester. . . cumulative grade point average the cumulative grade point average cgpa indicates the overall academic performance of a student in all the courses registered up to the latest completed semester. the cgpa is computed similarly as the sgpa, considering all the courses in all semesters. the cgpa is calculated on the basis of all pass grades a , a, a-, b, b-, c, c-, d , except audit courses and courses in which s x grade is awarded, obtained in all completed semesters. the sgpa and cgpa calculation are based on credits earned completed at iit jodhpur alone. . grade card and transcript a grade card shall be issued to each student at the end of each semester, and a transcript at the end of the programme. iit jodhpur grade card and transcript will only indicate the courses, credits and grades completed at iit jodhpur and the total number of credits without grades earned in other academic institutions in a particular semester, if applicable. . waiver of requirements in special cases the rules and regulations procedures and requirements stated in this manual, other than those related to admissions to the academic programmes, may be waived in special circumstances by the ac on the recommendation of the department with the approval of chairman, senate. all such exceptions have to be reported to the senate. . make-up examinations a student who has missed minor s or the major examination due to genuine reasons like illness etc. may be permitted to write a make-up examination for the missed components. the student should make an application to the dean academics through the course instructor within ten days from the date of the examination missed, explaining the reasons for their absence. applications received after this period need not be entertained. the permission to take a make-up examination will be given under exceptional circumstances such as admission to a hospital due to illness. a student needs to produce the necessary document subject to one of the following categories: students residing in the hostels should produce a medical certificate issued by the medical officer of the institute that he she was admitted to the hospital during the period of the missed quiz exam. students residing in the hostels and taking medical consultation with outside doctors are required to obtain written permission from the medical officer of the institute hospital before they proceed for such consultation. students residing in the hostels but taking medical consultation with outside doctors are required to obtain an endorsement on the certificate of treatment by the medical officer of the institute hospital. a student staying outside the campus permanently temporarily must produce a medical certificate from the registered medical practitioner and the same should be duly endorsed by the parent guardian. a slot-wise make-up examination for major will be held during the makeup supplementary week as per academic calendar of the subsequent semester for those who are permitted to take the make-up examination. a student who misses this make-up examination will not normally be given another make-up examination. however, in exceptional cases of prolonged illness resulting in the student missing a make-up examination, the chairman of the senate, in consultation with the dean of academics may permit the student to appear for make-up examination any day before the end of the first week of the next semester. under no circumstances, prorating can be done for the missed examinations or attendance. a. regulations for undergraduate programmes . undergraduate programmes iit jodhpur currently offers bachelor of technology b. tech. programs, and capability linked opportunities for undergraduate students to complete minor interdisciplinary area specializations or department area specialization. a student can also opt for mtech dual degree in departmental area or minor in entrepreneurship leading to mtech in entrepreneurship or department area specialization in engineering innovation. . undergraduate admissions . btech programmes . . general admissions admissions to the btech programmes are made once a year in july through the all-india level joint entrance examination jee conducted by iits. the procedures and other requirements for admission are specified in the jee information brochure brought out every year. . . cultural exchange programmes admissions are also offered to foreign nationals under the cultural exchange fellowship program of the government of india, administered by indian council of cultural relations iccr , new delhi. persons interested in these programs are required to apply through the indian high commission embassy in their respective countries. . . change enhancement of program a student already admitted to a btech programme may switch to another department through branch change. a student can enhance his her programme to a minor interdisciplinary area specialization leading to m. tech. in minor interdisciplinary area, major department area specialization leading to m. tech. in department area, minor in entrepreneurship, minor in entrepreneurship leading to m. tech. in entrepreneurship and department area specialization in engineering innovation through industrial translation . the rules governing these changes are given in section branch change and section . for all others . . reservation policy the reservation policy of government of india will be followed. . student exchange program student exchange program provides for a one two-semester visit by students between the two academic institutions on a reciprocal basis. the visiting student must be a full-time student enrolled in a degree program in their home institution. the exchange program is open to full-time undergraduate and graduate students of each home institution. it will be executed as per the pre-approved arrangement including an mou between the institutions. selection of students under such program will be made by the dugc after assessing the preparedness of students to meet the requirements of the planned coursework research at the host institution and the relevance of the planned coursework research to the enrolled degree program. a visiting student may carry out research or take courses for credit or otherwise or may use other academic facilities as per pre-approved arrangement including an mou . under exchange program, a student of iit jodhpur can register at another academic institution in india or abroad with the expectation of credit transfer up to credits per semester in lieu of the course work or research work through a pre-approved arrangement including an mou. on return, the student may apply to dugc for waiver of credits from her his program requirements which s he thinks are equivalent to the courses successfully completed at the visited academic institution as an exchange student. with the application, the student must submit an official transcript of the grades obtained by her him at the visited academic institution as an exchange student and other documents material that the concerned dugc may require for evaluation. the dugc will determine, by whatever means it deems fit, the equivalent credits requirements for which the student may be given a waiver in her his programme at iit jodhpur. dugc will submit its recommendations to course equivalence committee for its approval. moreover, the credits grades indicated in the grade sheet obtained from the academic institution in which the student has completed the courses should be used by the student as part of his her transcripts. iit jodhpur transcripts will only indicate the courses, credits and grades completed at iit jodhpur and the total number of credits without grades earned in other academic institutions in a particular semester. the cgpa calculation based on credits earned completed at iit jodhpur alone is to be considered for award of prizes. the credits earned at the visited academic institutions will be taken into account for the calculation of minimum required credits for the award of the degree. . visiting students a visiting student is a student who is registered for a degree in a recognized institute or university in india or abroad, and who is officially permitted by that institute or university to complete part of his her academic requirements at iit jodhpur. for that purpose, the visiting student may carry out research or take courses for credit or otherwise or may use other academic facilities. a person can be admitted as a visiting student on a duly sponsored application to the dean academics . a visiting student may be admitted for a maximum period of one year. a visiting student will be required to pay all applicable fees depending upon the status, program, and nationality. students so admitted also will be governed by all rules, regulations, and discipline applicable to regular students of the institute. . cancellation of admission students admitted provisionally or otherwise to any program shall submit copies of their mark sheets, provisional certificates, etc. of the qualifying examination and other documents by the last date specified for the purpose in the academic calendar. the senate reserves the right to cancel the admission of any student, who fails to submit the prescribed documents by the specified date or to meet other stipulated requirement s . also, the senate reserves the right to cancel the admission at any later time, if it is found that the student had provided some false information or suppressed relevant information while seeking admission. . fulfillment of admission requirements admission to any undergraduate program requires that the applicant be eligible, go through the laid-down admission procedure, and pay the prescribed fees. the senate should formally approve all admissions to the undergraduate programmes. . curriculum and academic requirements . academic load calculation of credits for a course for ug programmes the total credits for a course are calculated by taking into account the number of lectures, tutorial, and practical hours l-t-p assigned as given in table . . each credit is associated with the number of contact hours and the expected number of self-learning hours on an average to be spent by the student for each contact hour to meet academic demand of the course. table . ltp-structure and credit assignment. type l-t-p distribution of contact and beyond contact hours total credits tc th contact hours ch beyond contact hours bch total hours th hour of lecture - - hour of tutorial - - hour of lab - - . . . hour of project - - contact hour for project refers to the involvement of students in the laboratory, discussion, etc. . capability linked opportunities for undergraduate students a btech student can opt for one of the following capabilities linked opportunities major department specialization interdisciplinary specialization minor btech mtech dual degree . . eligibility criteria for opting a major department specialization, minor interdisciplinary specialization a student should have earned a minimum credits with the cgpa more than or equal to . at the end on th semester to opt for capability linked opportunity. b btech mtech dual degree in the chosen specialization students who have already opted for major department specialization, minor interdisciplinary specialization can opt for dual-degree programme from the eighth semester provided they have earned minimum credits with at least cgpa at the end of the th semester. . . minimum credit requirements a major department specialization, interdisciplinary specialization and minor a student needs to complete a total of credits in the major department specialization or minor interdisciplinary specialization area offered. credits out of can be taken up as a part of open electives whereas the student is required to opt for an additional credits in the form of course overload. this will be indicated on the degree. registration for additional courses for major department specialization, interdisciplinary specialization and minor starting from the sixth semester, students having earned credits with cgpa more than or equal to . are permitted to take up to extra credits as part of their normal load, which forms part of her his additional learning component, every semester in addition to the prescribed courses for their degree. b btech mtech dual degree in the chosen specialization a student needs to complete a total of credits in the minor, department, or interdisciplinary area offered. it will include credits earned for major department or minor interdisciplinary area specialization excluding the project credits. . course categories and academic requirements for various programmes course categories and academic requirements for various programmes are given in the table below: table . course categories and academic requirements s.n . course type course category btech regular btech with specialization dual degree institute core i engineering ie science is humanities ih programme linked l science ls programme core p programme compulsory pc programme electives pe btech project pp open o electives oe specialization major minor department interdisciplinary s compulsory sc elective se mtech m in minor, department, or interdisciplinary area compulsory mc electives me project mp open electives mo total graded non-graded n humanities nh engineering ne design practical experience nd total graded non graded must not include any project course . maximum duration of the program the maximum duration for the completion btech programs shall be registered semesters. . academic performance requirements the minimum requirements on credits earned for continuation in a b. tech. programme at the end of the second registered semester is specified in the following table: table . criteria for continuation at the end of the second registered semester description minimum number of credits to be earned gen obc gen-ews sc st pd minimum for continuation if a student does not meet the criteria specified in table . , he she may opt to restart the programme or else their registration will be terminated. the restart will be permitted only once. dean ug pg should propose a guideline for mentoring the student under probation. dean of students should also involve in the process. if a student chooses to restart after the first two registered semesters, then the credits earned and semesters registered till that point will not be counted towards the graduation requirements. the re-start will be indicated on the transcript. . . criteria to put a student on academic probation : from the third semester onward if a student fails to earn a minimum of credits in any registered semester, then he she will be placed on academic probation. a student placed on probation shall be monitored, including mandatory attendance in classes, special tutorials and mentoring. mentoring would comprise structured guidance under a senior student. if a student is on academic probation for two consecutive registered semesters, then his her registration will be terminated. if a student earns less than or equal to credits in any registered semester a warning shall be given to him her and intimation be sent to the parents. the two semesters allowed for the academic probation should be counted towards the total duration allowed for the program. . assistantship for btech -m. tech. dual-degree programmes the students of dual-degree programmes will be considered for award of institute research teaching assistantship if they have earned credits by the end of the eighth semester. only those students who have either qualified gate or have a cgpa more than . will be eligible for this assistantship. the assistantship will be provided for a maximum period of months beginning from the summer semester following the eighth semester, provided the student is registered for mtech major project in that semester. a student availing assistantship will be required to provide hours of assistance per week besides his her normal academic work. for continuation of assistantship, a student will need to secure sgpa of . . a student receiving assistantship will be eligible for a total of days leave during the -month period. he she will not be entitled to mid-semester breaks, winter and summer vacations. . ug registration . summer courses students can register for courses during summer up to a maximum of eight credits on payment of registration fee at prescribed rates. the summer term is not a regular semester and only academically deficient students who have low cgpa and or fewer credits than advised by the curriculum till that point in the programme , major students, minor students, and such students who are short of maximum eight credits to complete all graduation requirements may register during this period. for core courses, only students with failed backlog may be considered for summer registration. in case any vacancies are left in the courses being offered during the summer term once the requirements of the above categories of students are fulfilled, other students may register for these courses to fulfil some of their graduation requirements in advance. the total number of contact hours for the courses remains the same as that during the regular semesters, and therefore the courses run at an accelerated pace. the evaluation and grading patterns also remain the same as during the regular semesters. . limits on registration an undergraduate student should register for a minimum of credits in a semester. the maximum number of credits permitted for a ug student in a semester is . an undergraduate student may be permitted to register for a maximum of four credits per semester for independent-study or self-study course . exceptions to regular rules regarding academic load under-load: students who are identified as academically deficient on academic probation may register for a maximum of credits. over-load: overloading may be allowed only for students who are not on academic probation and satisfy one of the following criteria: students are allowed to overload only when they need or less additional credits to complete all the requirements of their programme. beyond the second semester, any student with a cgpa of . or higher may be allowed to overload. . change of registration from b. tech. programme to btech- m. tech. dual degree programme a btech student having opted for major minor specialization with cgpa or more at the end of the seventh semester and fulfilling requirements mentioned earlier may be allowed to switch to btech- m. tech. dual degree program in the chosen specialization at the beginning of the eighth semester. the mtech degree can be any one of the approved programmes of the institute. all requirements of mtech degree will be applicable to all such students. all such changes of registration shall be reported to the senate. . evaluation of special ug only courses . btech project evaluation dugc will appoint a committee for btech project evaluation. the committee will ensure that award of letter grade would be as per relative grading policy. the evaluation will be based on the report and a viva-voce examination on the project. dugc will form the evaluation criterion and declare it to students. . composition of department undergraduate committee dugc the dugc will be constituted of all ug faculty advisors and head of department. the head of department will be the chairperson and one of the faculty advisors would be the convenor. . engineering innovation at the completion of an engineering innovation project the student will submit a report which will be evaluated by duly appointed examiner s by dugc. the evaluation will be based on the report and a viva-voce examination on the project entrepreneurship and a letter grade is awarded. evaluation policy has to be declared by the concerned department from the first day of the class. . design project evaluation at the completion of a project, the student will submit a project report which will be evaluated by duly appointed examiner s by dugc. the evaluation will be based on the report and a viva-voce examination on the project and s or u grade is awarded. evaluation policy has to be declared by the concerned department from the first day of the class. . conduct and evaluation of btech -m. tech dual degree project allotment of students to supervisors will be made based on the preferences of the students and supervisor s . the supervisor and area identification must be completed by the end of the eighth semester. coordinator, m. tech. program would advise until the student is assigned to a regular supervisor s . the evaluation criterion would be the same as section . . entrepreneurship project at the completion of entrepreneurship, the student will submit a report which will be evaluated by duly appointed examiner s by dean academics-ug associate dean academics-ug . the evaluation will be based on the report and a viva-voce examination on the entrepreneurship and a letter grade is awarded. . termination . termination from btech program a student may be terminated from the btech programme by ac, if the student a is absent without authorized leave of absence for eight weeks or more in a semester; or b fails to report and register by the last date of registration without a bonafide reason; or c violates the code of conduct, involves in ragging, etc. as confirmed by a committee constituted for the purpose; or d does not earn the prescribed minimum number of credits within the maximum duration of the program; or e is on academic probation for two consecutive semesters. . appeal against termination a student, who is terminated from the btech program can appeal to the chairman, senate, for reconsideration. while making such an appeal, the student is expected to give reasons for poor academic performance and or why the termination should be reconsidered. the senate shall take a final decision after considering all the available inputs. but, the senate will not entertain any further appeal for review, unless substantial additional information is brought to its notice. . leave rules application for leave of absence should be addressed to the convener dugc, and submitted with a medical certificate, if applicable. usually, leave must not be availed of without prior approval of the dugc. . mid-semester recess and vacation undergraduate students are entitled to avail of mid-semester recess and vacation as specified in the academic calendar. . short leave a student may be granted leave of absence during the semester for a maximum of days on medical grounds, and for days for any other valid reason. . semester withdrawal it may be applicable in unforeseen circumstances or for medical reasons. absence for a period of four or more weeks in any semester will result in automatic withdrawal from that semester. dugc can approve and intimate office of academics regarding the leave of the student for records. in case, the leave extends beyond a semester, it can only be approved through the academic committee. semester withdrawal on the medical ground will not be counted towards the maximum permissible duration of the programme for the student. . academic leave to help students broaden their horizons and gain course work experience, she he may be permitted to proceed to other academic institutes industry r d organization in india or abroad. academic leave can be requested for any of the following reasons, such as a fieldwork b experimental work training using specialized facility not available at iitj c entrepreneurship initiative d engineering innovation e exchange program as part of an exchange program with an academic institution in india or abroad f internship work all such requests must be evaluated and approved by dugc before the leave is granted. a student may be allowed to spend a maximum duration of one summer term and two semesters on academic leave. a student during academic leave can earn a maximum of credits per semester as certified by the dugc and approved by the course equivalence committee. . branch change a an undergraduate student is eligible to apply for branch change at the end of the second semester only, provided the student satisfies the following criteria: . secured a cgpa, at the end of the second semester, of: i. greater than or equal to . for sc st and pd applicants ii. greater than or equal to . for other applicants . completed all prescribed course credits for the first two semesters including the non-graded courses . . no backlog at the end of the second semester. b the student should have no disciplinary action against him her. c change of the branch will be permitted strictly in the order of merit as determined by cgpa at the end of the second semester. each available seat may be occupied by students of any category. for students of sc st pd category, concession in eligibility criteria is given as per rule a . d in case more than one student applying for branch change have the same cgpa, the tie shall be resolved on the basis of jee ranks of such applicants. e in making a change of branch, the strength of a branch should not fall below of the sanctioned strength and should not go above of the sanctioned strength. f the conditions mentioned in item a above will not be insisted upon for change to a branch in which a vacancy exists with reference to the sanctioned strengths, and the concerned student was eligible as per jee rank for admission to that branch at the time of entry to iit jodhpur. g notwithstanding any of the conditions listed above, a student with cgpa of or more at the end of the second semester will be allowed to move to a branch of his her choice. . requirements for graduation a student is deemed to have completed the requirements for graduation if she he has met the conditions laid down in clauses . to . . . minimum duration of residence minimum duration of residence is given in the table below: table . minimum residential requirement s.no. program minimum duration of residence in semesters . b. tech. including minor department interdisciplinary area specialization . b. tech. mtech . academic the student shall be declared to have fulfilled the academic requirements if she he has earned the minimum credits as per table . in section . for all degrees . . payment of fees and dues the degree will be awarded after obtaining no dues clearance from all concerned sections as deemed necessary by dean academics . . no case of disciplinary action the student shall not be considered to have completed the academic requirements if there is any case of indiscipline pending against her him. . completion of engagement in ncc, nss or nso the student should have completed extra-curricular activity like performing arts, sports, national cadet corps, national service schemes, and national sports organisation for a period of at least two semesters during their btech program. . award of degrees . . provisional certificate a student who completes all the graduation requirements specified in clauses . to . , can be provided a provisional certificate by the office of dean academics on the approval of chairman, senate. certificate will have mention of major, minor, department or interdisciplinary specialization wherever applicable. . . degree certificate a student who completes all the graduation requirements specified in clauses . to . , is recommended by the senate to the board of governors bog for the award of the appropriate degree in the ensuing convocation. the degree can be awarded only after the bog accords its approval. the certificate will have mention of major, minor, department or interdisciplinary specialization wherever applicable. . amendments notwithstanding anything contained in this document, the senate of iit jodhpur reserves the right to modify amend without notice, the curricula, procedures, requirements, and rules pertaining to its btech programs. b. regulations for postgraduate programmes . postgraduate programmes the indian institute of technology jodhpur currently offers the following postgraduate programmes. . master of science msc . dual degree: msc-mtech . master of technology mtech . dual degree: mtech-phd. . doctor of philosophy phd . postgraduate admissions the process of admission for all the programs offered by the institute normally is underway during april-may for semester and during november-december for semester . in addition, the department may process applications for admissions to phd programs on a continuous basis and admit students as per the existing procedure. . categories of admission a candidate can be admitted in any one of the following categories i. full-time regular ii. full-time sponsored iii. part-time iv. external v. executive however, all categories are not applicable for all pg programs. further, programmes can be offered in a combination of these modes like fully sponsored part-time program . i full-time regular in campus student who can register for up to full credit permissible per semester. a student supported by a project of the institute will be considered a full-time regular student. ii full-time sponsored in campus student who can register for up to full credit permissible per semester. the candidate is sponsored either by his her employer or by self. a self-sponsored candidate must have two years of relevant industrial r d academic experience. iii part-time a part-time student is a working professional who, while employed, attend regular classes as per the schedule of the institute. the student must be employed in the neighbourhood of iit jodhpur. the student must produce a noc from the employer for pursuing the programme at iit jodhpur. the student can register only for a limited number of credits as compared to a full-time regular student. iv external a student working in an industry r d establishment academic institution which is equipped with the necessary research and library facilities. the employer must relieve the student to stay in the campus to complete the minimum residency requirements. v executive only for m. tech. a professional who can carry out complete the programme requirement in . an accelerated fashion minimum in months , or . accumulates credits as per convenience and petitions a degree in a maximum of years. . the part-time or full-time mode by attending courses offered in synchronized remote contact mode and limited direct interaction . eligibility for admission a the eligibility conditions given below are the absolute minimum. departments may prescribe any requirements over and above, subject to the approval of the senate. b the number of admissions that can be made to any program shall be decided by the senate from time to time. c reservation of seats for various reserved categories shall be prescribed by the board of governors. . . admission to m. sc. program regular the admission to the msc programs offered by the institute will be through any one of the following two avenues. a the applicants qualified through the joint admission test for master jam organized by iits. b the applicants having a bachelor s degree in any relevant discipline - or -year program may be admitted based on written test and or interview conducted by iit jodhpur. the applicants under the category b must have a minimum of marks for gen obc for sc st category in aggregate or as specified by the university institute or a minimum cgpa of . for gen obc . for sc st category on the scale of ; with corresponding proportional requirements when the scales are other than on for example . for gen obc category . for sc st on a scale of or a first-class as specified by the university institute. . . admission to m sc m tech dual degree program regular the admission to the m. sc.-mtech dual degree programs offered by the institute will be through any one of the following two avenues. a the applicants qualified through the joint admission test for master jam organized by iits. b the applicants having a bachelor s degree in any relevant discipline - or -year program may be admitted based on written test and or interview conducted by iit jodhpur. the applicants under the category b must have a minimum of marks for gen obc for sc st category in aggregate or as specified by the university institute or a minimum cgpa of . for gen obc . for sc st category on the scale of ; with corresponding proportional requirements when the scales are other than on for example . for gen obc category . for sc st on a scale of or a first-class as specified by the university institute. . . admission to m tech program regular a the applicant must have bachelor s degree in engineering or science year program or a master s degree in science, mca, pharmacy, medical sciences, agricultural sciences and veterinary sciences or in a related field b a minimum of marks for gen obc for sc st category in aggregate or as specified by the university institute or a minimum cgpa of . for gen obc . for sc st category on the scale of ; with corresponding proportional requirements when the scales are other than on for example . for gen obc category . for sc st on a scale of or a first-class as specified by the university institute. c the applicant must either have a valid gate score or exempted from gate as per mhrd circular or have qualified an equivalent national examination or have qualified in the written test and or interview conducted by iit jodhpur. . . admission to mtech program executive part-time external sponsored a the applicant must have bachelor s degree in engineering or science -year program or a master s degree in science, mca, pharmacy, medical science, agricultural science and veterinary science or in a related field. b a minimum of marks for gen obc for sc st category in aggregate or as specified by the university institute or a minimum cgpa of . for gen obc . for sc st category on the scale of ; with corresponding proportional requirements when the scales are other than on for example . for gen obc category . for sc st on a scale of or a first-class as specified by the university institute. c the applicant must have a minimum of two years of work experience after qualifying degree in industry r d laboratories academic institutions at the time of registration to the program. however, the credit accumulation for the program may start immediately after the qualifying degree. petitioning for the degree can happen only year after registration. d the applicant must qualify the written test and or interview conducted by iit jodhpur. . . admission to m .tech. phd dual degree program regular a the applicant must have bachelor s degree in engineering or science -year program or a master s degree in science, mca, pharmacy, medical science, agricultural science and veterinary science or in a related field b a minimum of marks for gen obc for sc st category in aggregate or as specified by the university institute or a minimum cgpa of . for gen obc . for sc st category on the scale of ; with corresponding proportional requirements when the scales are other than on for example . for gen obc category . for sc st on a scale of or a first-class as specified by the university institute. c the applicant must either have a valid gate score or exempted from gate as per mhrd circular or have qualified an equivalent national examination or have qualified in the written test and or interview conducted by iit jodhpur. . . admission to phd program regular a candidates admitted in this category shall not be a registered student in any other academic program in india or abroad, and shall not be a full-time or part-time employee of any organization in india or abroad. b the applicant must have a master s degree in engineering, pharmacy, agricultural science, science, humanities, social sciences, management with at least marks or at least . cpi or cgpa for gen gen-ews obc for sc st , or c the applicant must have mbbs with md ms, bvsc with mvsc, bds with mds, bpth with mpth, both with moth or equivalent with at least marks or at least . cpi or cgpa for gen gen-ews obc for sc st in bachelor s degree, or d the applicant must have a bachelor s degree of minimum four-year duration in engineering or science or medicine or pharmacy or agricultural science or veterinary science or equivalent with at least marks or at least . cpi or cgpa for gen obc for sc st . . . admission under any special scheme like quality improvement programme qip , defence personnel the procedures and criteria for admission of these candidates can be decided with the approval of chairman, senate. . . . admission of indian nationals residing abroad inra and foreign nationals inra candidates must have been residing abroad continuously for at least one year at the time of applying for admission. the applications of inra and foreign nationals may be processed by the departments as and when they are received or according to any schedule convenient to the department. the applications should be scrutinized to make sure that, both in terms of qualifications and attainment they are comparable with the candidates admitted in the general category. department will conduct vc based interview for ascertaining suitability of the candidate. the applications of foreign nationals, who are sponsored by the indian council of cultural relations iccr will be scrutinized by the department concerned to assess their suitability for admission to the programme. the department's recommendation will be sent to the chairperson, senate through the chairperson, ac. . . admission to phd sponsored external part-time a candidates admitted in this category shall not be a registered student in any other academic program in india or abroad. b the applicant must have a master s degree in engineering, pharmacy, agricultural science, science, humanities, social sciences, management with at least marks or at least . cpi or cgpa for gen gen-ews obc for sc st , or c the applicant must have mbbs with md ms, bvsc with mvsc, bds with mds, bpth with mpth, both with moth or equivalent with at least marks or at least . cpi or cgpa for gen gen-ews obc for sc st in bachelor s degree, or d the applicant must have a bachelor s degree of minimum four-year duration in engineering or science or medicine or pharmacy or agricultural science or veterinary science or equivalent with at least marks or at least . cpi or cgpa for gen obc for sc st . e the applicant must have a minimum of two years of work experience after qualifying degree in industry r d laboratories academic institutions at the time of registration to the program. f the applicant must qualify the written test and or interview conducted by iit jodhpur. . admission of non-degree students a non-degree student is a student who is registered for a degree in a recognized institute or university in india or abroad, and who is officially sponsored by that institute or university to complete part of his her academic requirements at iit jodhpur. for that purpose, the non-degree student may carry out research or take courses for credit or otherwise or may use other academic facilities. any candidate can be admitted as a casual student for specific courses provided the candidate satisfies the minimum eligibility criteria specified in section . . the application must be routed through the office of dean r d. students so admitted will be governed by all rules, regulations and discipline of the institute. . reservation policy the reservation policy of government of india will be followed. pg registration . limits on registration maximum and minimum number of credits a student can register in different programs: msc: an msc student can register for a maximum of credits and a minimum of credits in a semester. mtech: an mtech student can register for maximum and minimum credits as per table . . table . maximum and minimum credits an mtech student can register for during the regular semester summer term mtech student registered under different categories maximum credits minimum credits regular semester executive accelerated executive normal executive slow-paced executive part time full-time regular sponsored external part-time summer term executive accelerated executive normal executive slow-paced full-time regular full-time sponsored external part-time mtech-phd dual degree direct phd joining after btech - the maximum and minimum credits that an mtech-phd dual degree student can register are equivalent to that of an mtech regular external part-time student. phd: a phd student can register for maximum and minimum credits as per table . . table . maximum and minimum credits a phd student regular can register for during the regular semester phd student registered under different categories maximum credits minimum credits full-time regular external part-time . . registration kept alive rka a student admitted to an mtech program who has at least completed minimum credit requirement of the first semester, can keep his studentship alive while he is pursuing any professional activity, by opting for rka in subsequent semesters. the candidate must indicate his intent of rka before the last date of late registration through drc to dean academic . the candidate has to pay appropriate registration fees for rka status. a student can maintain rka status for a maximum of semesters. . change of registration from mtech programme to mtech-phd dual degree programme a regular student registered for the mtech programme having cgpa or more at the end of the second semester may be allowed to switch to mtech-phd dual degree program till the end of the third semester. as a special case, a student can switch to a dual degree in the fourth semester with the approval of drc, provided his her cgpa is or more, who will then be required to complete his her candidacy requirements by the end of the fifth semester. all conditions of mtech-phd dual degree program will be applicable to all such students. all such changes of registration shall be reported to the senate. . change of registration from part-time mtech to part-time phd program a part-time mtech student having cgpa or more after completion of at least credits may be allowed to change his her registration to the phd program. the credits earned will be counted towards his her phd course work requirements. . change of registration from full-time to part-time external phd programme a student admitted to a full-time phd programme may be permitted to change to a part-time phd programme. a student requesting such a conversion must: i have successfully completed his her candidacy requirement; ii get the request endorsed by the supervisor s and the drc; iii produce a no objection certificate from his her employer for carrying out the research work. . maximum duration of a program msc - registered semester mtech regular and part-time external executive - registered semesters which may include maximum semesters of registration kept alive rka after completion of the first semester. tuition fee post rka will be same as that of sponsored candidates. phd and mtech-phd dual degree regular and part-time external - registered semesters which may include maximum semesters of registration kept alive rka after completion of the two semesters. tuition fee post rka will be same as that of sponsored candidates. students may request for rka to dean academics through drc. . course registration students will be eligible to register for courses as per the criterion specified in section . and table . . the drc irc must oversee that the student has not registered for a similar course during her his masters or bachelors program. academic requirements . academic load calculation of credits for a course for pg programmes the total credits for a course are calculated by taking into account the number of lectures, tutorial, and practical hours l-t-p assigned as given in table . and . for msc and mtech phd programmes respectively. each credit is associated with the number of contact hours and the expected number of self-learning hours on an average to be spent by the student for each contact hour to meet academic demand of the course. table . ltp-structure and credit assignment for msc type l-t-p distribution of contact and beyond contact hours total credits tc th contact hours ch beyond contact hours bch total hours th hour of lecture - - hour of tutorial - - hour of lab - - . . . hour of project - - contact hour for project refers to the involvement of students in the laboratory, discussion, etc. table . ltp-structure and credit assignment for mtech phd type l-t-p distribution of contact and beyond contact hours total credits tc th contact hours ch beyond contact hours bch total hours th hour of lecture - - hour of tutorial - - hour of lab - - . hour of project - - hour of thesis phd - - contact hour for project refers to the involvement of students in the laboratory, discussion, etc. . course categories for masters programmes compulsory course mc programme elective me open elective mo project works mp non-graded ng . academic credit requirements for msc students course categories and academic requirements for msc students are given below in table . . table . programs credits to be earned for msc students programs minimum credits to be earned mc me mo mp total msc chemistry msc mathematics msc physics . academic credit requirements for mtech students executive mtech course categories and academic requirements for mtech students are given below in table . . table . minimum credits to be earned for mtech students programs minimum credits to be earned mc me mo mp ng total mtech sensors and internet of things mtech cyber physical system mtech thermofluids engineering mtech advanced manufacturing engineering and design mtech metallurgical and materials engineering mtech artificial intelligence mtech computer science and engineering mtech bioscience and bioengineering mtech data and computational sciences . academic credit requirements for msc - mtech dual degree minimum credit requirements for msc - mtech dual degree is the cumulative sum of credit requirements for respective msc program and mtech program as mentioned in sections . and . . . academic credit requirements for mtech - phd dual degree course categories and academic requirements for mtech - phd dual degree students are given below in table . . table . minimum credits to be earned for dual degree mtech and phd students programs minimum credits to be earned mc me mo mp ng total mtech-phd dual degree sensors and internet of things mtech-phd dual degree cyber physical system mtech-phd dual degree communication and signal processing mtech-phd dual degree thermofluids engineering mtech-phd dual degree manufacturing engineering mtech-phd dual degree design engineering mtech-phd dual degree metallurgical and materials engineering mtech-phd dual degree computer science and engineering mtech-phd dual degree artificial intelligence mtech-phd dual degree bioscience and bioengineering the drc irc must oversee that the student has not registered for a similar course during bachelors program and take necessary corrective action by suggesting alternative courses . academic credit requirements for phd students the minimum credits to be earned through courses is listed in table . . table . credit requirements for phd students s.no. phd in with minimum credits through course work minimum credits through thesis work . engineering discipline idrps mtech, m.e. or msc engineering in an engineering discipline msc degree in a science discipline btech, b.e. or bsc engineering in an engineering discipline . science, humanities or social science discipline msc, m.a. and m.phil. degree in a science, humanities or social science discipline . academic performance requirements . . minimum performance for continuation and graduation in a program the minimum cgpa requirement for continuation and graduation in a program is given in below table . . table . minimum cgpa requirements sr. no. program continuation in programme for graduation msc only graduation requirement refer . . . mtech . . dual degree msc and mtech . . dual degree mtech and phd . . phd . . at the completion of course work . . continuing criteria for msc msc- the student must earn at least credits at the end of the second semester for continuation in the program. . . minimum performance for continuation assistantship fellowship the minimum cgpa requirement for continuation assistantship fellowship is given in below table . table . minimum cgpa requirements for continuation of assistantship fellowship sr. no. program continuation of assistantship fellowship mtech . dual degree mtech and phd . phd . . leave rules application for leave of absence should be addressed to the convener drc, and submitted with a medical certificate, if applicable. usually, leave must not be availed of without prior approval of the drc. . leave a maximum of days in an academic year including leave on medical grounds mid semester break . the student must apply for leave in advance even during the summer winter term or mid-semester break. a phd student cannot avail leave for more than days at a stretch an mtech msc student cannot avail leave for more than days at a stretch the leave beyond days in an academic year may be granted in exceptional cases by drc without assistantship during that period. . other leaves maternity leave for phd students is sanctioned as per the directives of mhrd. it will not be counted towards the maximum permissible duration of the programme. any other leave may also be permissible as per the guidelines of mhrd. . semester withdrawal may be applicable in unforeseen circumstances or for medical reasons. absence for a period of four or more weeks in any semester will result in automatic withdrawal from that semester. in all such cases, the fellowship will be stopped with immediate effect and it will be continued for only after the student rejoins the institute. drc can approve and intimate office of academics regarding the leave of the student for records. in case, the leave extends beyond a semester, it can only be approved through the academic committee. semester withdrawal on the medical ground will not be counted towards the maximum permissible duration of the programme for the student. . academic leave academic leave can be requested for any of the following reasons, such as . fieldwork . library work- because of a specialized collection at a particular library . experimental work training using specialized facility not available at iitj . attending conferences workshops summer winter schools symposium . collaborative work as part of joint mtech phd supervision . collaborative work for a specific problem related to his ongoing phd programme as indicated in his research proposal . exchange program as part of an exchange program with a sister institution in india or abroad all such requests must be evaluated and approved by src drc irc before the leave is granted. src drc irc must also make recommendations regarding continuation of fellowship during academic leave. a student may be allowed to spend a maximum duration of one year on academic leave. a student during academic leave can earn a maximum of credits per semester as certified by src and approved by drc. . financial assistance financial assistantship scholarship will be provided to the eligible students admitted under regular full-time program. the eligibility criteria are as per the following: . msc program merit-cum-means fellowship as per institute norms. . msc-mtech dual-degree program a student having completed minimum credit requirements of an msc program at the end of the second year with a cgpa or b have qualified gate can have financial support from mhrd or project fund. . mtech program a regular mtech student with gate can have financial support from mhrd or project fund. a student may be exempted from gate as per mhrd guidelines. . executive m tech program students admitted in this category will not be provided any financial assistance from the institute. . mtech phd dual degree program rules and regulations governing financial assistance for dual degree students will be at par with regular phd students. . phd program a regular phd student admitted to the institute will be eligible for financial assistance as per the norms of iit jodhpur. a a candidate having btech b.s. four-year program master's degree with gate net jrf nbhm or equivalent can have financial assistance as per mhrd norms or equivalent applicable for non-science departments. b the requirement of gate is exempted for an applicant with mtech or equivalent post-bachelor's degree c a student may be exempted from gate as per mhrd guidelines. a phd student would be eligible for enhancement in the scholarship after two years provided the student has met qualifier requirement. the enhanced fellowship will commence from the date of completion of both the conditions. no arrears will be provided due to delay in completing the qualifier requirement. the teaching research assistantship of a phd student shall stop from the day of submission of the thesis. . rules and regulation for conduct and evaluation of m. tech. msc project allotment of students to supervisors will be made based on the preferences of the students and supervisor s . the supervisor and area identification must be completed by the end of the first semester. coordinator, m. tech. program would advise until the student is assigned to a regular supervisor s . each semester a letter grade will be awarded after examination by a committee consisting of drc, supervisor s and two members conversant with the field of research with at least one member external to the department maybe outside the institute also . drc will appoint examiners in consultation with the supervisor. the same committee may examine more than one thesis. external member can be on vc. drc will ensure that award of letter grade would be as per relative grading policy. a regular full-time student must register for mtech project part- in the summer semester following nd semester. he must obtain a satisfactory grade to continue mtech project part- in the next semester. his performance in the summer semester will be evaluated by his supervisor. rules and regulations for ph. d. m. tech.-ph. d. dual degree program . thesis supervisor s . . selection of phd candidates the selection should be based on merit and capability of the candidate to conduct research. there should at least be a faculty member available or likely to join in the areas of interest of the candidate at the time of selection. . . appointment of thesis supervisor s ph. d. students shall be admitted in the department and no supervisor shall be assigned at the time of selection. allotment of students to supervisor s will be made based on the preferences of the students and supervisor s . for both ph. d. and m. tech. - ph. d. dual degree supervisor s and area identification must be completed by the end of the first semester the convener, drc department research committee coordinator interdisciplinary research program would advise until the student is assigned to a regular supervisor s . there shall not be more than two supervisors, in general, for a student. additional supervisor can be allowed with the approval of chairman, senate. a supervisor from outside the institute, before the qualifier , may be appointed on the request of student supervisor s with the recommendation of the drc irc and the dean academics and approval of the chairman, senate. the external supervisor will be requested to sign intellectual property right ipr and non-disclosure agreement nda documents as a part of acceptance. from the financial point of view the institute will have no obligation to the external supervisor. . . caretaker supervisor additional supervisor whenever the supervisor proceeds on short leave for a period up to one year, the drc irc interdisciplinary research committee shall appoint a caretaker supervisor in consultation with the supervisor and the student to take care of the administrative requirements. whenever the supervisor proceeds on long leave for a period more than a year, then an additional supervisor needs to be appointed on the suggestion of the supervisor. the supervisor going on lien or sabbatical may continue supervising students and the supervisor can opt for either an additional supervisor or a caretaker supervisor. the supervisor on his her retirement or on resignation may continue as a supervisor and will have to opt for an additional supervisor provided the student has cleared qualifier before the supervisor s retirement resignation. . . composition of departmental research committee drc the drc will consist of coordinators of mtech, mtech-phd dual degree and phd programs of the department, head of the department and senior professor associate professor proposed by the head. the drc will be chaired by professor associate professor nominated by head of the department. the chairman of the drc will be a member of the academic committee. the drc has to be approved by dean academics . phd program coordinator will be the convenor of drc and will be proposed by the head. the tenure for the drc will be years. . . composition of interdisciplinary research committee irc the irc will consist of all coordinators of idrps and senior professor associate professor as the chairman of the irc will be nominated by dean academics . the chairman of irc will be a member of ac. one of the idrp co-ordinators would be convenor of the committee. the tenure for the irc will be years. the irc will be approved by the dean academics . . change of research supervisor change of supervisor s , under exceptional circumstances, shall be permitted by dean academics on the recommendation of the drc irc after obtaining the consent of i the student ii the present supervisor s and iii the proposed supervisor s . if required, realignment of student s research program will happen under the supervision of the drc irc. . student research committee src . . composition of src the src will normally consist of supervisor s and three other faculty members conversant with the field of research with at least one member external to the department maybe outside the institute also . a student research committee src for the candidate shall be proposed by the supervisor s , recommended by the drc irc and approved by dean academics . the src shall have one member identified as chairman for administrative functions and the supervisor s will act as convener. chairman, src is to be appointed by dean academics . the appointment of src should be completed by the end of the first semester. any subsequent changes in the composition of src shall be communicated through the drc irc to dean academics for record. chairman and supervisor s shall be the internal examiners for the evaluation of the thesis. the src is expected to monitor the progress of the candidate until the completion of the program. . annual progress monitoring meeting apm the academic progress of all registered phd students will be reviewed once in a year by the src and peers in the institute. the review will be based upon i annual progress report and ii a poster presentation open to all. src will award a satisfactory non-satisfactory grade based upon i and ii . two consecutive non-satisfactory grades will lead to termination of registration. for implementational convenience, academic calendar must indicate two days in a year for conducting annual progress evaluation of research scholars. following the groupings of students and scheduling guidelines are suggested . for students joining in st semester of ay: during st july to th september of the year. . for students joining in nd semester of ay: during st december to th february of the year. the first apm will be conducted after the successful completion of qualifier requirements. each semester satisfactory progress or unsatisfactory progress will be reported by the supervisor s through the src for record. any situation in exception to the above will be processed by the academic committee and approved by dean academics . qualifier requirements of phd student the following four components together will constitute qualifier candidacy requirements for a ph. d. student and for a ph. d. candidate to be eligible for the enhanced srf fellowship. . completed course requirements with the minimum cgpa specified in section . . . cleared comprehensive examination . successful presentation on state of the art of the chosen field of research . successful presentation and defense of research proposal the ph. d. students are normally expected to complete successfully the qualifier requirements before the beginning of the fifth semester of his her registration in the ph. d. program and in any case not later than the beginning of the sixth semester after their registration in the ph. d. program. part-time candidates will need to complete the qualifier requirement before the beginning of the seventh semester. . . comprehensive examination of ph. d. mtech-phd student the comprehensive examination must be designed to test the general capability of the student and the breadth of his her knowledge in the discipline and areas related to the field of research. the comprehensive examination shall be conducted by a comprehensive examination committee of the department idrp. the comprehensive examination will consist of a written test with three papers. departments will offer at least papers for conducting a comprehensive examination. each paper will have broad coverage of one essential sub-area of the department. the course content of these papers will be approved by the academic committee and the senate. the syllabus of papers for the comprehensive examination will not be the same as courses offered by the department; it must be designed to test the breadth of the knowledge in that area. the src will specify a set three papers as a comprehensive requirement for a particular student. these three papers may be selected from across the departments. the comprehensive examination requirements shall be intimated to the phd student within two weeks of src formation. all comprehensive examinations will be scheduled on two fixed days in a year. it can coincide with the annual progress evaluation day of doctoral candidates. students may decide to appear for three papers on the same day or on different days. a student can appear in the comprehensive examination before he she has completed the course requirements and satisfied the minimum specified cgpa requirement. if the performance of the phd student in a comprehensive examination paper in the first attempt is not satisfactory, he she will be given one more opportunity to appear within six months of the first attempt. for clearing of the comprehensive examination, a student must perform satisfactorily in all papers. comprehensive examination to be completed by the students: phd : within semesters direct phd and mtech - phd dual degree: within semesters . . state of art seminar sota every phd student is required to give a general seminar in the department covering the state of art of the area of research. the presentation must also include patent landscaping of the area. the presentation will be evaluated by the src. a candidate must have a satisfactory grade in sota awarded by src for becoming eligible to present his research proposal. . . research proposal research proposal report presentation will be evaluated by src after successful completion of sota. the research proposal must include representative research work equivalent to research work worth credits. src will allocate a letter grade based on the performance of the candidate. . . candidacy for the phd degree a student enrolled in the phd program is formally admitted to the candidacy for the phd degree after he she has completed the qualifier requirements for the degree. only such students who are admitted to the candidacy will be allowed to submit phd thesis. . relaxation in mtech -phd dual degree program mtech-phd dual degree students who have successfully completed all qualifier requirements, under exceptional conditions, as approved by src after years can also convert into part-time external phd student and exit with mtech degree if all conditions for part-time external conversion are satisfied. the renewal of their registration for every semester however, will be considered only if src finds their progress to be satisfactory and recommends the continuance of registration. . cancellation of registration the registration of a student whose progress is not found to be satisfactory by the src or who has not enrolled will be liable for cancellation. the registration of a student who has not submitted his her thesis before the end of the maximum permissible period specified in section . will be liable for cancellation. . synopsis synopsis will consist of an open seminar and a comprehensive internal closed-door assessment of the research work, through a pre-synopsis report, by src. the student can submit the synopsis only if the src is satisfied with the quality and quantity of the work for submission as a phd thesis. publications arising out of the thesis are to be submitted along with the pre-synopsis report. students should submit the synopsis and thesis within six months of the open seminar date. if required, an extension of three months may be permitted by dean academics on the recommendation of src. if the synopsis and thesis are not submitted in the specified period, the student will be asked to present the synopsis again. on satisfactory completion of the prescribed courses with minimum cgpa specified in . . , the comprehensive examination, the sota, the research work and the synopsis, the student shall submit the requisite copies of the synopsis of his her research work in the required format through the supervisor s and hod to the academic section for consideration of the src. the student should have at least one paper either published or accepted for publication in a refereed journal refereed conference src members are required to certify the quality of journals conference . . thesis submission and evaluation the supervisor s shall propose a list of examiners consisting of at least four faculty members from abroad and faculty members from india, who have the expertise in the area in which the student undertook research. for selecting an examiner, the following guidelines should be followed the examiners shall have at least years of post-phd experience; no two proposed examiners shall be from the same organization; and the examiners can be faculty members or scientists, of standing and repute. chairman, senate may ask for additional names for examiners . the chairman, senate, shall select minimum two examiners from the proposed list, of which at least one should be an examiner from outside india. the consent of these examiners shall be taken before sending the thesis to them. in addition, src and supervisor s shall be the examiners of the thesis. the viva voce will be conducted in the presence of src, supervisor s and the external examiner. one of the external examiners shall attend the thesis defense. the examiners shall submit a written report on the thesis within a period of two months from the date of receipt of the thesis. if both examiners declare the thesis as acceptable for award of phd degree, the dean academics shall request the supervisor s to hold the thesis defense by the student. if any of the examiners reject the thesis for the award of the phd degree, the dean academics shall report the matter to the chairman, senate, for further consideration. the chairman, senate, will refer the thesis to a third examiner under special circumstances; else the registration of the student shall stand cancelled in the phd program. if both examiners reject the thesis for the award of the phd degree, no degree shall be awarded by the institute, and the registration of the student shall stand cancelled in the phd program. if an examiner suggests a revision of the thesis, the student shall resubmit the thesis after the revision within a prescribed time period of months in consultation with the supervisor s . when both examiners recommend the thesis as accepted for the student to defend the thesis, or after the resubmission of the thesis after incorporating the suggestions corrections given by the examiners, the student shall publicly present the thesis and defend the contention of the thesis. the committee consisting of chairman src, supervisor s , the examiner from within india and other faculty members quorum would be chairman, src, supervisor s and an external examiner , who participated in the comprehensive examination of the student, shall evaluate the thesis defense of the phd student also. on their recommendation, dean academics shall recommend to senate, to consider the award of phd degree to the student. . graduation requirements a student is deemed to have completed the requirements for graduation if she he has met the requirements laid down in clauses . to . below. . minimum residential requirement table . minimum residential requirement s.no. program qualifications at the time of joining the program minimum duration in semesters of residence . msc all qualifying degrees . msc-mtech dual degree all qualifying degrees . mtech programs full-time regular sponsored all qualifying degrees part-time all qualifying degrees executive all qualifying degrees . ph. d. programs full-time regular engineering discipline mtech, m.e. or msc engineering in an engineering discipline msc degree in a science discipline btech, b.e. or bsc engineering in an engineering discipline science, humanities or social science discipline msc, m.a. and m.phil. degree in a science, humanities or social science discipline part-time all qualifying degrees external all qualifying degrees . academic the student shall be declared to have fulfilled the academic requirements if she he has earned the minimum credits as per section . for m. sc., section . for m. tech., section . for m. sc.-mtech dual degree, section . for mtech-phd dual degree and section . for phd, while meeting the minimum cgpa requirements as mentioned in section . . . no dues clearance degree will be awarded after obtaining no dues clearance from all concerned sections as deemed necessary by dean academics . no case of disciplinary action the student shall not be considered to have completed the academic requirements if there is any case of indiscipline pending against her him. . award of degrees . . provisional certificate a student, who completes all the graduation requirements specified in clauses . to . , can be provided with a provisional certificate by the office of dean academics on the approval of chairman, senate. . . degree certificate a student, who completes all the graduation requirements specified in clauses . to . , is recommended by the senate to the board of governors bog for the award of the appropriate degree in the ensuing convocation. the degree can be awarded only after the bog accords its approval. . amendments notwithstanding anything contained in this document, the senate of iit jodhpur reserves the right to modify amend, without notice, rules and regulations of the postgraduate programmes at iit-jodhpur.
